ID,Text
44||Tyrosine phosphorylation, regulated by protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) and kinases (PTKs), is important in signaling pathways underlying tumorigenesis. A mutational analysis of the tyrosine phosphatase gene superfamily in human cancers identified 83 somatic mutations in six PTPs (PTPRF, PTPRG, PTPRT, PTPN3, PTPN13, PTPN14), affecting 26% of colorectal cancers and a smaller fraction of lung, breast, and gastric cancers. Fifteen mutations were nonsense, frameshift, or splice-site alterations predicted to result in truncated proteins lacking phosphatase activity. Five missense mutations in the most commonly altered PTP (PTPRT) were biochemically examined and found to reduce phosphatase activity. Expression of wild-type but not a mutant PTPRT in human cancer cells inhibited cell growth. These observations suggest that the mutated tyrosine phosphatases are tumor suppressor genes, regulating cellular pathways that may be amenable to therapeutic intervention. Phosphorylation of tyrosine residues is a central feature of many cellular signaling pathways, including those affecting growth, differentiation, cell cycle regulation, apoptosis, and invasion (1, 2). This phosphorylation is coordinately controlled by protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) and phosphatases (PTPs). Although a variety of PTK genes have been directly linked to tumorigenesis through somatic activating mutations (3–6), only a few PTP genes have been implicated in cancer (7–10). Moreover, it is not known how many or how frequently members of the PTP gene family are altered in any particular cancer type. We have systematically addressed these issues by comprehensive mutational analysis of the PTP gene superfamily in colorectal tumors.  The PTP gene superfamily is composed of three main families: (i) the classical PTPs, including the receptor PTPs (RPTPs) and the nonreceptor PTPs (NRPTPs); (ii) the dual specificity phosphatases (DSPs), which can dephosphorylate serine and threonine in addition to tyrosine residues; and (iii) the low molecular weight phosphatases (LMPs) (1). Using an approach similar to that described in a recent bioinformatic analysis of PTPs in the mouse genome (11), we employed a combination of Hidden Markov Models representing catalytic domains of members of the PTP superfamily to identify 53 classical PTPs (21 RPTPs and 32 NRPTPs), 33 DSPs, and one LMP in the human genome (12). This analysis revealed a set of genes representing all known human PTPs (13) as well as seven putative PTPs.  As an initial screen to evaluate whether these phosphatases are genetically altered in human cancer, we analyzed the coding exons of all 87 members of this gene superfamily in 18 colorectal cancers. A total of 1375 exons from all annotated RPTPs, NRPTPs, DSPs, and LMPs were extracted from genomic databases (12). These exons were amplified by polymerase chain reaction from cancer genomic DNA samples and directly sequenced with dye terminator chemistry (12). Whenever a presumptive mutation was identified, we attempted to determine whether it was somatically acquired (i.e., tumor specific) by examining the sequence of the gene in genomic DNA from normal tissue of the relevant patient.  From the 3.3 Mb of sequence information obtained, we identified six genes containing somatic mutations, including three members of the RPTP subfamily (PTPRF, PTPRG, and PTPRT) and three members of the NRPTP subfamily (PTPN3, PTPN13, and PTPN14). These six genes were then further analyzed for mutations in another 157 colorectal cancers. Through this strategy, we identified 77 mutations in the six genes, in aggregate affecting 26% of the colorectal tumors analyzed (table S1 and Fig. 1). Examination of these six genes in seven other tumor types identified PTPRT mutations in two of 11 (18%) lung cancers and two of 12 gastric cancers (17%), and PTPRF mutations in one of 11 (9%) lung cancers and one of 11 (9%) breast cancers. No mutations were identified in 12 pancreatic cancers, 12 ovarian cancers, 12 medulloblastomas, or 12 glioblastomas (table S1 and Fig. 1). In total, 83 nonsynonymous mutations were observed, all of which were somatic in the cancers that could be assessed (12).    Download high-res image  Open in new tab  Download Powerpoint Fig. 1. Distribution of mutations in PTPRT, PTPN13, PTPN14, PTPRG, PTPRF, and PTPN3. Black arrows indicate location of missense mutations, red arrows indicate location of nonsense mutations or frameshifts, and boxes represent functional domains (B41, band 41; CA, carbonic anhydrase; FN3, fibronectin type III; IG, immunoglobulin; MAM, meprin/A5/PTPμ; PDZ, postsynaptic density, discs large, zonula occludans; PTPc, catalytic phosphatase domain). Black stars indicate PTPRT mutants evaluated for phosphatase activity (Fig. 2), and the red star indicates PTPRT mutant evaluated for effects on cell proliferation (Fig. 3).  Fifteen of the 83 mutations were nonsense, frameshift, or splice-site alterations, all of which were predicted to result in aberrant or truncated proteins. In 16 tumors both alleles of the phosphatase gene appeared to be mutated, a characteristic often associated with tumor suppressor genes. The majority of tumors with PTP gene mutations also contained mutations in KRAS or BRAF, and nine tumors contained alterations in previously reported tyrosine kinase genes (table S1). Thus, the mutant phosphatases identified in this study are likely to operate through cellular pathways distinct from those associated with previously identified mutant kinases.  Analysis of mutations in tumors is complicated by the fact that mutations can arise either as functional alterations affecting key genes underlying the neoplastic process or as nonfunctional “passenger” changes. The multiple waves of clonal expansion and selection that occur throughout tumorigenesis lead to fixation of any mutation that had previously occurred in any predecessor cell, regardless of whether the mutation was actually responsible for the clonal expansion. Two independent lines of evidence suggest that the sequence alterations we observed are functional. First, the ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous mutations provides an indication of selection, as synonymous alterations usually do not exert a growth advantage. There were no somatic synonymous mutations detected in the colorectal cancers analyzed, resulting in a ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous mutations of 77 to 0, much higher than the expected 2:1 ratio for nonselected passenger mutations (P < 1 × 10–6). Second, the prevalence of mutations in the coding regions of the analyzed genes was ∼19 per Mb of tumor DNA, similar to the prevalence of functional somatic alterations observed in other gene families [e.g., the tyrosine kinome (6)] and significantly higher than the prevalence of nonfunctional alterations previously observed in the cancer genomes (∼1 per Mb, P < 0.01) (14). These data support the idea that these mutations were the targets of selection during tumorigenesis.  The great majority of the nonsense and frameshift mutations (Fig. 1) would result in polypeptides devoid of C-terminal phosphatase catalytic domains, thereby leading to inactivation of the phosphatase. To evaluate whether tumor-specific point mutations alter phosphatase activity, we biochemically tested mutant versions of PTPRT, the most frequently mutated PTP in the superfamily. Mutations in both intracellular PTP domains (D1 and D2) were evaluated. His-tagged versions of the catalytic region of wild-type PTPRT, two D1 mutants (Q987K and N1128I), and three D2 mutants (R1212W, R1346L, and T1368M) were produced in bacteria and analyzed for phosphatase activity by using 6,8-difluoro-4-methylumbelliferyl phosphate (DiFMUP) as a substrate (Fig. 2) (12). All D1 and D2 mutants had reduced phosphatase activity compared with the wild-type protein (Fig. 2). The kinetic parameter Kcat was reduced in both D1 mutants, while Km was increased in all three D2 mutants, suggesting that mutations in the two domains may have different effects on enzymatic activity. Although it has been thought that the D2 domain is usually catalytically inactive (1), our results are consistent with recent studies that show that the D2 domain is important for phosphatase activity in some receptor phosphatases (15).    Download high-res image  Open in new tab  Download Powerpoint Fig. 2. Evaluation of phosphatase activity of mutant PTPRT. (A) Saturation kinetics of wild-type and mutant PTPRT. His-tagged versions of PTPRT protein segments comprising the two catalytic domains containing wild-type (WT) and tumor-specific mutant sequences were expressed in bacteria and purified using nickelaffinity chromatography. Equal amounts of WT and mutant proteins were used to evaluate enzyme kinetics. The rate of hydrolysis of substrate (DiFMUP) is plotted against increasing substrate concentration. Data were fitted to the Michaelis-Menton equation, and the resulting kinetic parameters of WT and mutant proteins are indicated in (B).  These biochemical data on missense mutations, coupled with the large number of truncating mutations, suggested that PTPRT functions as a tumor suppressor gene. To determine whether PTPRT expression can inhibit tumor cell growth, we transfected wild-type PTPRT into HCT116 colorectal cancer cells (12). An identical expression vector containing an R632X mutant of PTPRT was used for comparison. Wild-type PTPRT potently inhibited cell growth in this assay, as seen by the substantial decrease in the number of neomycin-resistant colonies compared with the R632X mutant or with vector alone (Fig. 3, A and B). Similar results with wild-type and mutant PTPRT were also observed in DLD1 colorectal cancer cells.    Download high-res image  Open in new tab  Download Powerpoint Fig. 3. PTPRT overexpression suppresses growth of human cancer cells. (A) HCT116 colorectal cancer cells were transfected with wild-type (WT) PTPRT construct, truncated R632X mutant PTPRT construct, or empty pCI-Neo vector. The photographs show colonies stained with crystal violet after 14 days of geneticin selection. (B) Number of resistant colonies (mean of two 25 cm2 flasks) for WT PTPRT, mutant PTPRT, and empty vector.  The combination of these genetic, biochemical, and cellular data suggest that PTPRT and the other identified phosphatases are likely to act as tumor suppressors. This is consistent with the function of other phosphatases implicated in tumorigenesis (7, 8, 16) and with the general role of phosphatases in inhibiting various growth-promoting signaling pathways (2). The absence of biallelic mutations in a subset of the analyzed tumors suggests that some alterations may act in a dominant-negative fashion or may affect gene dosage, mechanisms that have been previously involved in inactivation of other tumor suppressor genes (17, 18).  Little is known about the functional role of the tyrosine phosphatases discussed here. PTPN13 appears to be involved in apoptosis (19) and may be partly responsible for the antitumor effects of tamoxifen (20). Overexpression of PTPN3 inhibits growth of NIH/3T3 cells, possibly through interaction with valosin-containing protein (VCP/p97) (21). PTPN14 and PTPRF are thought to play a role in cell adhesion by regulating tyrosine phosphorylation of adherens junction proteins (22, 23). Because increased phosphorylation of adherens junctions has been shown to increase cell motility and migration (22, 24), mutational inactivation of these genes may be an important step in cancer cell invasion and metastasis. PTPRG maps to chromosome 3p14.2, a region frequently lost in lung, renal, and early-stage breast tumors, and is thought to be a target of the translocation at 3p14 in familial renal cell carcinoma (25–27). However, no point mutations in PTPRG (28) or any of the other genes identified here have been previously described in any cancer. PTPRT is expressed in the developing central nervous system and in the adult cerebellum (29) and had not been thought to play a role in the growth or differentiation of other tissues. We have found that PTPRT is expressed in a variety of human tissues, including normal colon epithelium as well as cells derived from colorectal cancers (fig. S1).  Phosphatases affect signaling pathways that may be amenable to therapeutic intervention in cancer cells (2). Although reactivation of incapacitated phosphatases is likely to be pharmacologically challenging, identification of the corresponding kinases that phosphorylate substrates normally regulated by the mutant phosphatases could provide novel therapeutic targets. Like the analysis of genetic alterations in tyrosine kinases (6), the present study suggests the possibility of individualized therapy based on the mutant phosphatases present in specific tumors. Conceivably, this approach would have broad therapeutic use, because more than 50% of colorectal tumors analyzed to date have alterations in at least one member of the tyrosine phosphatome or kinome.
45||The receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase T (PTPRT/PTPρ) is the most frequently mutated tyrosine phosphatase in human cancer. PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation. In its extracellular region, PTPρ has cell adhesion molecule-like motifs, including a MAM domain, an immunoglobulin domain and four fibronectin type III (FNIII) repeats. Tumor-derived mutations have been identified in all of these extracellular domains. Previously, we determined that tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and immunoglobulin domains of PTPρ reduce homophilic cell-cell aggregation. In this manuscript, we describe experiments in which we evaluated the contribution of the FNIII repeats to PTPρ-mediated cell-cell adhesion. Our results demonstrate that deletion of the FNIII repeats of PTPρ result in defective cell-cell aggregation. Furthermore, all of the tumor-derived mutations in the FNIII repeats of PTPρ also disrupt cell-cell aggregation. These results further support the hypothesis that mutational inactivation of PTPρ may lead to cancer progression by disrupting cell-cell adhesion.  Keywords: Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase, PTPRT, PTPρ, fibronectin type III repeat, cell-cell aggregation, cell-cell adhesion Go to: 1. Introduction Cancer progression and metastasis is in part influenced by changes in cell adhesion and tyrosine phosphorylation mediated by cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) (Paschos et al. 2009; Wheelock et al. 2008), as well as tyrosine kinases and tyrosine phosphatases, respectively (Freiss and Vignon 2004; Ostman et al. 2006). Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatases (RPTPs) comprise a family of proteins that have extracellular CAM domains coupled to cytoplasmic tyrosine phosphatase domains, and thus can impact cancer progression by regulating both cell adhesion and tyrosine phosphorylation (Brady-Kalnay 2001; Ostman et al. 2006).  The type IIB PTPμ-like subfamily of RPTPs includes PTPμ, PTPρ, PTPκ, and PCP-2 (PTPλ) (Aricescu et al. 2008; Brady-Kalnay 2001). The extracellular segment of the PTPμ-like RPTPs contain motifs found in CAMs, including a MAM domain, an immunoglobulin (Ig) domain and four fibronectin type III (FNIII) repeats (Aricescu et al. 2008; Brady-Kalnay 2001; Ostman et al. 2006). PTPμ subfamily members bind homophilically (i.e. the “ligand” for PTPμ is an identical PTPμ molecule on an adjacent cell) (Brady-Kalnay et al. 1993; Cheng et al. 1997; Gebbink et al. 1993; Sap et al. 1994; Yu et al. 2008; Zondag et al. 1995). The Ig domain of PTPμ is responsible for promoting homophilic interactions (Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994), and proper cell surface localization (Del Vecchio and Tonks 2005). However, both the MAM and Ig domains as well as the first two FNIII repeats are required for efficient cell-cell adhesion of PTPμ (Aricescu et al. 2006; Aricescu et al. 2007; Aricescu et al. 2008; Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Cismasiu et al. 2004; Zondag et al. 1995). PTPρ and PTPκ also mediate homophilic cell-cell adhesion (Sap et al. 1994; Yu et al. 2008). However, PCP2 has not yet been demonstrated to mediate cell-cell adhesion or aggregation although in vitro binding studies indicate it can bind homophilically (Cheng et al. 1997).  All type IIB RPTPs are potential tumor suppressor genes (Burgoyne et al. 2009a; Flavell et al. 2008; McArdle et al. 2001; Yan et al. 2006). Notably, PTPρ is the most frequently mutated phosphatase gene in human cancers including colon, lung, skin and stomach cancers (Forbes et al. 2008; Wang et al. 2004). Defective adhesion mediated by PTPρ may be at least one mechanism of cancer progression. In fact, cancer derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ are defective in mediating cell-cell aggregation (Yu et al. 2008).  In addition to the tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ previously described (Wang et al. 2004; Yu et al. 2008), the majority of extracellular domain mutations are located in the FNIII repeats of PTPρ (Wang et al. 2004). Given the importance of FNIII repeats in PTPμ-mediated adhesion and aggregation (Aricescu et al. 2007), we tested the contribution of the FNIII repeats of PTPρ to PTPρ-mediated adhesion. We determined that deletion constructs where each of the extracellular domains of PTPρ is removed, including the FNIII repeats, are defective in mediating cell-cell aggregation of Sf9 cells. Furthermore, when we engineered the cancer-derived mutations in the FNIII repeats of these PTPρ mutant proteins, they also result in defective cell-cell aggregation. These results demonstrate the importance of the FNIII repeats in contributing to proper cell-cell adhesion and suggest that adhesion mediated by PTPρ is likely important for the tumor suppressor activity of PTPρ.  Go to: 2. Materials and methods 2.1 Baculovirus generation  Baculoviruses were generated by transfecting cells with the BaculoGold™ Linearized Baculovirus DNA (BD Biosciences, San Diego, CA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The baculovirus for wild-type PTPρ was previously described (Yu et al. 2008).  2.2 Sf9 cell culture  Insect Sf9 cells from (BD Biosciences) were maintained at 27°C in Graces Insect Medium (BD Biosciences). The medium was supplemented with 10% FBS from (Hyclone, Logan, UT) and Gentamicin (MP Biomedicals, Solon, OH). Viruses were added to Sf9 cell medium to induce the expression of proteins of interest. Cells were harvested 30 hours post-infection for further analysis.  2.3 Generation of PTPRT deletion constructs  The PTPρ-ΔMAM, PTPρ-ΔIg, PTPρ-ΔFNIII-1, PTPρ-ΔFNIII-2, PTPρ-ΔFNIII-3 and PTPρ-ΔFNIII-4 constructs were generated by fusion PCR using the full-length PTPRT pVL1393-V5-His vector as the template. The primers 5’-GAAGATCTATGGCGAGCCTCGCCGCG-3’ and 5’-CCGGAATTCGGATCCTGGGGCGCTCTGAGCCCGGG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔMAM construct; the primers 5’-GCGTGGGAGGCTCTCTGCATGGATGAGCAAGGAC-3’ and 5’-CAATGGGTCTTGCTCATCCATGCAGAGAGCCTCCCACGCCCATTG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔIg construct; the primers 5’-CTGCACACTTGGTCCTGGTTTTCACGATCAGCTCCGCGTA-3’ and 5’-TACGCGGAGCGTCGTGAAAACCAGGACCAAGTGTGCAG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-1 construct; the primers 5’-CCGCCAGGGCCTCCCCTCACCGAGGAAGACGTTCCAGGAG-3’ and 5’-CTCCTGGAACGTCTTCCTCGGTGAGGGGAGGCCCTGGCGG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-2 construct; the primers 5’-GAGGAGCTGGTGGTGCAGACTAAAATTTCAGCTCCATCCA-3’ and 5’-TGGATGGAGCTGAAATTTTAGTCTGCACCACCAGCTCCTC-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-3 construct and the 5’-GTCACCACTCGGATTGCCACCGGTGCCTCCACCCAGAATT-3’ and 5’-AATTCTGGGTGGAGGCACCGGTGGCAATCCGAGTGGTGAC-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-4 construct.  2.4 Immunoblotting  Sf9 cells were lysed in a standard lysis buffer (20 mM Tris·HCl, pH 7.5, 1% Triton X-100, 150 mM sodium chloride, 2 mM Benzamidine, 2.5μg/ml Aprotinin, 2.5μg/ml Leupeptin, and 0.5μg/ml Pepstatin). Samples were solubilized in 2X SDS loading buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE. Samples were transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (Whatman, Piscataway, NJ) and immunoblotted with SK18 (Brady-Kalnay et al. 1993), which cross-reacts with PTPρ.  2.5 Cell surface expression of PTPρ  Cell surface expression of PTPρ protein in baculovirus infected Sf9 cells was determined using a modified biotin-avidin reaction with the Cell Surface Protein Isolation Kit (catalog# 89991, Pierce, Rockford, IL), as previously described (Yu et al. 2008). Briefly, Sf9 cell media was removed and the flasks were incubated with rocking for 30 minutes at 4°C in 5ml of 0.25mg/ml Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin in 1X PBS. The cells were mechanically removed from the flask, centrifuged, washed, and lysed according to the manufacturer’s protocols. To isolate cell surface expressed PTPρ the cell lysate was added to a NeutrAvidin Gel column and incubated for 60 min at room temperature (RT) with rocking prior to washing and eluting proteins with 200μl of sample buffer containing a final concentration of 55mM DTT for 60min at RT. The flow through was run on 6% SDS-PAGE gels and transferred to nitrocellulose. Total cell surface protein levels were normalized by immunoblotting cell lysates with an anti-actin antibody (JLA20). The normalized cell surface protein was run on 6% SDS-PAGE gels, transferred to nitrocellulose and immunoblotted with antibodies to PTPμ that also recognized PTPρ (SK18) followed by secondary antibody conjugated to HRP. The HRP signal was detected using a Fluor-S MAX MultiImager (Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc., Hercules, CA).  2.6 Aggregation Assays  Sf9 cells were harvested by trituration. The cell suspensions were added to glass scintillation vials and incubated at 27°C at 90 rpm in a gyratory shaker for 30 minutes. For a given condition, the cell suspension was transferred to a 100mm petri dish either prior to (0 time point) or 30 minutes after aggregation. Images were captured at 10X magnification with a Nikon TE-200 inverted fluorescent microscope (Tokyo, Japan). To quantify cell aggregates, pictures of four randomly selected fields were taken per dish. The area of each object (single cells and aggregates) was determined by the Metamorph software (Molecular Devices) using an auto-threshold setting for light objects and appropriate size filters that allowed the counting of cells and aggregates but not debris. The four replicates were combined to yield average readings per condition. The percent aggregation was then calculated as the average aggregate area at 30 minutes minus the average aggregate area at zero minutes divided by the average aggregate area at 30 minutes [(N30-N0)/N30]. A minimum of three independent experiments was performed per condition. Statistical significance was determined in Microsoft Excel using Student’s T-test. Error bars indicate standard error.  2.7 Site-directed mutagenesis  The I395V, Y412F, R453C, Q479E, S492F, N510K, T605M, V648G, A707T, and L708P tumor-derived mutations (Wang et al. 2004) were generated by fusion PCR using the full-length PTPRT pVL1393-V5-His vector as the template. The primers 5’-TGGCCCACAGAACGTGGAAGTCGTAGACATCAGAGCC-3’ and 5’-CTTCCACGTTCTGTGGGCCA-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the I395V mutant; the primers 5’-CAGTGGGAGCCCTTCGGCTTCGCGGTGACCCGCTGCCAT-3’ and 5’-AAGCCGAAGGGCTCCCACTG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the Y412F mutant; the primers 5’-CTACACCCTGCGAGGCCTGTGCCCCTTCATGACCATCCG-3’ and 5’-ACAGGCCTCGCAGGGTGTAG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the R453C mutant; the primers 5’-GAGCGAGGAGCTGGTGGTGGAGACTGAGGAAGACGTTCC-3’ and 5’-CCACCACCAGCTCCTCGCTC-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the Q479E mutant; the primers 5’-TGTTCCTCTAGAATTCATCCAAGGGGGGCCCT TT-3’ and 5’-ATGAATTCTAGAGGAACA-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the S492F mutant; the primers 5’-TCCAGTGGAAACCTCCCAAGGAGACCAATGGGGTCATCA-3’ and 5’-CTTGGGAGGTTTCCACTGGA-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the N510K mutant; the primers 5’-CCATTGAATGAGACAGACATGACC ATCACAGTGATGCTG3-’ and 5’-ATGTCTGTCTCATTCAATGG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the T605M mutant; the primers 5’-ATTATTGAGTGCTTTTC GGGGCCCGTGAGCTATCGGAAT-3’ and 5’-CCCGAAAAGCACTCAATAAT-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the V648G mutant; the primers 5’-CTACAGCATCTACTTCCAGACACTCAGCAAAGCCAATGG-3’ and 5’-TCTGGAAGTAGATGCTGTAG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the A707T mutant; the primers 5’-AGCATCTACTTCCAGGCACCCAGCAAAGCCAATGGAGAG-3’ and 5’-GGTGCCTGGAAGTAGATGCT-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the L708P mutant.  2.8 Mapping of PTPρ mutations onto the PTPμ crystal structure  The sequence of PTPμ and PTPρ were aligned using CLUSTALW. Mutations probed in this study were mapped using this sequence alignment onto the PTPμ structure (PDB ID: 2V5Y). The figure was prepared utilizing PyMOL 1.2r1 (http://pymol.org).  Go to: 3. Results 3.1 Deletions in the MAM, Ig, and FNIII repeat domains of PTPρ result in defective cell-cell aggregation  To test whether a protein mediates cell-cell aggregation or adhesion, one has to express the protein of interest in the non-adhesive cells. Otherwise, one cannot measure the aggregation or adhesion of a single molecule in the sea of other adhesion molecules naturally expressed in adhesive cells. This is the main reason that the non-adhesive Sf9 or Drosophila S2 cells are widely used models for such studies. To our knowledge, nearly all cell lines of epithelial origin are adhesive cells and thus are not suitable for these studies. Introduction of putative adhesion molecules into non-adhesive Drosophila S2 insect cells has been used to demonstrate adhesive functions for fasciclin II, connectin, Dtrk, ARK, Neuroglian, and Capricious molecules directly (Bellosta et al. 1995; Hortsch et al. 1995; Nose et al. 1992; Pulido et al. 1992; Shinza-Kameda et al. 2006; Snow et al. 1989). In a similar approach, we and others demonstrated that the full-length form of PTPμ induced aggregation, via a homophilic binding mechanism, when expressed in nonadhesive Sf9 insect cells, which are derived from the Fall army-worm Spodoptera frugiperda (Brady-Kalnay et al. 1993; Gebbink et al. 1993; Zondag et al. 1995). We have also used this system for analyzing PTPRT/PTP rho (Yu et al., 2008). Examples of other cell adhesion molecules that have been studied in Sf9 cells include L1 (Gouveia et al. 2008), Galectin-3 (Inohara and Raz 1995) and C-CAM1 (Phan et al. 2001). Insect S2 and Sf9 cells are extremely useful systems to analyze adhesive mechanisms of cell adhesion molecules.  The MAM domain, Ig domain, and first two-FNIII repeats are essential for PTPμ cell-cell aggregation (Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Zondag et al. 1995). To test whether these domains are the minimal essential regions required for PTPρ cell-cell aggregation, baculoviral PTPρ deletion constructs of the MAM domain, Ig domain, and each of the four individual FNIII repeats were made and expressed in non-adhesive Sf9 insect cells (Figure 1). All the PTPρ deletion constructs were expressed and appropriately trafficked to the cell surface (Figure 1). To test whether these domains contribute to PTPρ-dependent adhesion, Sf9 cells were evaluated for their ability to mediate cell-cell aggregation when expressing the deletion constructs. Aggregation assays with Sf9 cells expressing the deletion constructs were conducted alongside aggregation assays using Sf9 cells expressing wild-type PTPρ, which mediates cell-cell aggregation (Figure 2) and serves as a positive control (Yu et al. 2008). Deletion of any of the extracellular domains of PTPρ resulted in defective cell-cell aggregation compared to aggregation of wild-type PTPρ expressing Sf9 cells (Figure 2). Deletion of the fourth FNIII repeat was the least severe where ~23% aggregation was observed. Deletion of the MAM domain, Ig domain and FNIII repeats 1, 2 or 3 resulted in 5–16% aggregation. When the level of aggregation was quantified, we determined that all of the deletion constructs resulted in a large and statistically significant reduction in cell-cell aggregation (Figure 2, p-value<0.005). Together with our previous study, these results demonstrate that all of the extracellular domains of PTPρ are necessary for PTPρ-mediated cell-cell aggregation.  Figure 1 Figure 1 PTPρ deletion constructs are all expressed at the cell surface. Constructs containing deletions of one extracellular domain of PTPρ each were generated and expressed in Sf9 cells. Total cellular protein and cell surface protein were isolated ... Figure 2 Figure 2 Deletion of any of the extracellular domains of PTPρ disrupts cell-cell aggregation. Sf9 cells expressing deletion constructs of the individual extracellular domains of PTPρ were allowed to aggregate for 30 minutes prior to imaging. Scale ... 3.2 Tumor-Derived PTPρ Mutations in the FNIII repeats result in defective cell-cell aggregation  We next tested the effects of human tumor-derived mutations in the FNIII repeats of PTPρ on PTPρ-mediated cell-cell aggregation. We recently demonstrated that tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ are defective in cell-cell aggregation using the Sf9 aggregation assay (Yu et al. 2008), and given the above results, we hypothesized that mutations in the FNIII domains would likewise result in defective aggregation. Ten human tumor-derived mutations are located in the second, third and fourth FNIII repeats of PTPρ (Wang et al. 2004). To test whether these mutations also affect cell-cell aggregation, we engineered the ten human mutations by site-directed mutagenesis using the full-length PTPρ baculoviral construct as a template (see Figure 3). The ten mutations are expressed in Sf9 cells at the expected molecular weight and at similar levels to full-length human PTPρ (Figure 3). All of these mutants are expressed at the cell surface (Figure 3). When these mutant PTPρ proteins were expressed in Sf9 cells and tested in aggregation assays, we observed that all of the mutant PTPρ proteins resulted in fewer and smaller aggregates than wild type PTPρ (Figure 4). When the level of aggregation was quantified, we determined that all of the FNIII mutations significantly reduced cell-cell aggregation (16–43%) compared to cells expressing wild type PTPρ (68% aggregation, p-value<0.008, Figure 4).  Figure 3 Figure 3 PTPρ proteins containing tumor-derived mutations in their FNIII domains are expressed at the cell surface. Ten mutations in the FNIII domains of PTPρ were generated by site-directed mutagenesis and expressed in Sf9 cells. Total cellular ... Figure 4 Figure 4 Tumor derived mutations in FNIII domains of PTPρ are defective in cell-cell aggregation. Sf9 cells expressing the mutated PTPρ proteins were allowed to aggregate for 30 minutes prior to imaging. Scale bar equals 100μm. The percentage ... Go to: 4. Discussion PTPRT/PTPρ is the most highly mutated tyrosine phosphatase in human colon carcinomas. We and others found that PTPRT/ PTPρ is also mutated in lung, gastric and skin (melanoma) cancers (Forbes et al. 2008; Wang et al. 2004). The spectrum of mutations, which included nonsense mutations and frameshifts, suggested that these mutations were inactivating (Wang et al. 2004). Biochemical analyses demonstrated that missense mutations in the catalytic domains of PTPRT diminished its phosphatase activity and overexpression of PTPRT inhibited colon cancer cell growth. Moreover, we showed previously that the tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ are defective in cell-cell adhesion (Yu et al. 2008). All these data suggest that PTPRT/PTPρ normally functions as a tumor suppressor gene. The experiments presented in this manuscript evaluate the contribution of the individual extracellular domains of PTPρ to PTPρ-mediated adhesion. We demonstrate that in addition to the MAM and Ig domains, the FNIII repeats are required for PTPρ-mediated adhesion. Importantly, we also show that PTPρ-mediated adhesion is impaired by human tumor-derived mutations in those FNIII repeats. These studies indicate that all the tumor-derived mutations located in the extracellular domain of PTPRT are loss-of-function mutations, thereby providing further evidence that PTPRT is a tumor suppressor. This notion is further supported by our recent study showing that PTPRT knockout mice are highly susceptible to colon specific carcinogen azoxymethane (AOM)-induced colon cancer (Zhao et al.).  PTPμ-mediated cell-cell aggregation requires the MAM domain, Ig domain, and the first two FNIII repeats (Aricescu et al. 2006; Aricescu et al. 2007; Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Cismasiu et al. 2004; Zondag et al. 1995). The entire extracellular domain of PTPμ is predicted to make a rigid conformation with extensive interfaces between each of the domains (Aricescu et al. 2006). The minimal adhesive unit for functional cell-cell aggregation is the MAM domain, Ig domain and the first two FNIII repeats (Aricescu et al. 2006; Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Zondag et al. 1995). However, the FNIII repeats appear to play a role in spacing the key homophilic interaction domain(s) a certain distance from the plasma membrane. Deletion of the FNIII repeats changed the intercellular spacing of two apposing membranes (Aricescu et al. 2007). Cell-cell aggregation assays of the FNIII deletion constructs were not performed in that study (Aricescu et al. 2007). The amino acid residues of the interfaces between the extracellular domains are highly conserved between members of the type IIB RPTP subfamily (Aricescu et al. 2006; Aricescu et al. 2007) therefore it is likely that the PTPρ adhesive interface resembles that of PTPμ. Together our data support the hypothesis that the essential regions for PTPρ-mediated adhesion resemble those of PTPμ.  To gain insight into how the point mutations may alter the adhesive function of PTPρ, we modeled the human tumor derived PTPρ mutations onto the crystal structure of PTPμ (Figure 5). The crystal structure of PTPμ includes only the first three FNIII repeats (Aricescu et al. 2007). Four of these mutations fall within the second FNIII (FNIII-2) repeat (I395V, Y412F, R453C, Q479E). It is important to note that FNIII-2 is required for efficient cell-cell adhesion (Aricescu et al. 2006). Two of the mutations fall in the third FNIII (FNIII-3) repeat (S492F, N510K). The mutation within the linker region between FNIII-1 and FNII-2 (Y412F) could alter the flexibility or positioning between the two domains. The other mutations (I395V R453C, Q479E, S492F, N510K) appear to be clustered in surface exposed regions and/or near the linker regions between FNIII-2 and FNIII-3 that could alter flexibility, position of individual FNIII repeats and/or protein-protein interactions. While these mutations do not correspond to the adhesive interface hypothesized for PTPμ based upon a single static crystal structure (Aricescu et al. 2007), some of the mutations fall within the FNIII-2 repeat which is required for adhesion, and all of these surface modifications would likely alter either the three-dimensional topology and/or cis/trans interactions of PTPρ.  Figure 5 Figure 5 Structural modeling of the point mutations of PTPρ. The point mutations (indicated in red) evaluated in this manuscript were modeled onto the equivalent sites in the crystal structure of PTPμ. The PTPρ mutations likely alter cell-cell ... Other type IIB RPTPs also function as tumor suppressor genes, by regulating adhesion and/or tyrosine phosphorylation of effector proteins. Expression of PTPμ is reduced in human glioblastomas (GBM) and cell lines (Burgoyne et al. 2009a). Reduction in full-length PTPμ expression with a concomitant increase in a proteolytically processed cytoplasmic fragment of PTPμ is observed in GBM cells and both are correlated with decreased adhesion and increased migration observed in the disease (Burgoyne et al. 2009a; Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Over-expression of the full-length form of PTPμ suppressed migration of GBM cells and reduces their survival (Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Of note, at the same time that stable cell adhesion is reduced due to the loss of full-length PTPμ expression in GBM cells, a catalytically active cytoplasmic fragment of PTPμ is released and translocates to the nucleus (Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Catalytic activity of this fragment is also necessary for cell migration and viability of GBM cells (Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Therefore, both the tyrosine phosphatase activity of the cytoplasmic fragment of PTPμ and the loss of PTPμ-mediated adhesion may contribute to the invasiveness of GBM cells.  PTPκ is also implicated in tumor progression. PTPκ expression is reduced in melanoma cell lines and human tissue biopsies (McArdle et al. 2001), and in Hodgkin’s lymphoma cells (Flavell et al. 2008). Over-expression of PTPκ in Hodgkin lymphoma cells reduces cellular proliferation and survival (Flavell et al. 2008). Like PTPμ, PTPκ is proteolytically processed (Anders et al. 2006), potentially as a result of aberrant glycosylation (Kim et al. 2006). It is not clear whether adhesion or catalytic activity of PTPκ is required for its tumor suppressor activity (Flavell et al. 2008; Kim et al. 2006). Of note, the cleaved cytoplasmic domain fragment of PTPκ is catalytically active, translocates to the nucleus and promotes β-catenin-mediated transcription (Anders et al. 2006). Signaling via the PTPκ cytoplasmic fragment might augment the loss of stable cell-cell adhesion and may promote tumor progression.  Although speculative, it is interesting to postulate that tyrosine phosphatase activity and or cleavage of PTPρ will also be an important element of its tumor suppressor activity, as has been demonstrated for PTPμ and PTPκ. Interestingly, we identified and validated STAT3 as a direct substrate of PTPRT (Zhang et al. 2007). STAT3 is latent transcription factor that translocates from the cytoplasm to the nucleus after being phosphorylated at the Y705 residue. It is possible that the cleaved intracellular fragment of PTPρ, which contains the phosphatase domains, translocates to nucleus and dephosphorylates STAT3. Besco and colleagues found that PTPRT associates with the adhesion molecule E-cadherin and its binding partner p120 catenin, which are PTPRT substrates (Besco et al. 2006). p120 also translocates to the nucleus and associates with the Kaiso transcription factor (Daniel and Reynolds 1999). Given the frequency and distribution of mutations in PTPRT/PTPρ in human colon and other cancers, a more thorough understanding of its biological function is warranted.
46||Introduction  Preceding hematologic disorders are documented in one-quarter of adults with acute myeloid leukemia (AML).1 However, an unknown proportion of AMLs that apparently arise de novo may have developed from undiscovered abnormal hematopoiesis.  Mutations in CBL, encoding an E3 ubiquitin ligase, are found in 10% to 20% of chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) or juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) patients.2⇓⇓⇓⇓-7 Germline CBL mutations cause the CBL syndrome that recapitulates features of other RAS-MAPK pathway disorders and predisposes to JMML.8⇓-10 In AML, CBL mutations are rare but associated with inv(16).11⇓⇓-14  Here we describe the development of AML in an adult with CBL syndrome and JMML-typical loss of wild-type (WT) CBL in bone marrow.  Methods  Written informed consent of the patient included in the present study was obtained for sample storage and analyses before sampling, as approved by the local ethics committee. This study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Karyotype; mutations in NPM1, FLT3 (tyrosine kinase domain, internal tandem duplication), CEBPA, and CBL; and CBFB-MYH11 expression relative to ABL1 were assessed as described elsewhere.15⇓⇓-18 CBL mutated-to-WT allelic ratios were determined using the PyroMark Q96MD (Qiagen), and chromosomal copy numbers using CytoScanHD arrays (Affymetrix). Data were deposited at http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/ (E-MEXP-3997). Whole-exome sequencing was performed as reported19; variants were validated by Sanger sequencing. Methods are detailed in the supplemental data available on the Blood Web site.  Results and discussion  Characteristics of the AML  A 40-year-old man was diagnosed with AML in June 2011. His preexisting conditions were hereditary spherocytosis (diagnosed in 1996), coagulopathy (low FVII, X, XII, XIII), atrial fibrillation, and hypocholesterolemia; a splenomegaly was considered a consequence of the spherocytosis. At AML diagnosis, his white blood cell count was 19 390/µL, with approximately 30% blasts and 30% dysplastic monocytes (supplemental Figure 1). The marrow contained 50% CD117+ blasts and 30% CD14+ monocytes; the karyotype was 46,XY,add(4)(q?31),inv(16)(p13q22)[21]/46,XY,inv(16)(p13q22)[1]. CBFB-MYH11 (type D) was detected with a ratio of 46.23 in blood. NPM1, CEBPA, and FLT3 mutations were absent.  The patient received “3+7” induction followed by dasatinib (clinicaltrials.gov #NCT00850382). Six weeks after the start of therapy, complete remission (CR) was documented. The patient received 4 consolidation courses with high-dose cytarabine. At last follow-up (September 2013), he was in continuous CR, with no CBFB-MYH11 detectable.  Identification of a germline CBL mutation  Between the treatment courses, the patient’s monocyte counts rose to extraordinarily high levels. Although monocytes were within normal limits after treatment and in blood counts dating back to 1996 (supplemental Table 1), this observation prompted the question of whether the patient had an underlying monocytic disorder.  Because monocytosis is a hallmark of JMML and CMML, we examined the mutation status of CBL exons 8 and 9 in blood collected at the AML diagnosis. We indeed found a p.D390V-mutation, located in the frequently mutated RING finger domain. Assessing the germline origin of the mutation, we also identified it in buccal mucosa and hair follicles. We concluded that the patient had a previously undiagnosed CBL syndrome, with the preexisting coagulopathy and atrial fibrillation being part of the phenotype (supplemental Table 2).8⇓-10  No CBL mutations were detected in the blood of both of his parents, indicating de novo occurrence in the patient’s germline. The patient has no siblings.  Zygosity of the CBL mutation  Copy number–neutral loss-of-heterozygosity (LOH) of the CBL-containing chromosomal band 11q23.3 is common in children with CBL syndrome and JMML.8,10 11q-LOH was also detectable in marrow mononuclear cells from our patient during AML. Moreover, the 11q-LOH persisted in B lymphocytes, granulocytes, and monocytes collected later during CR (Table 1 and supplemental Figure 2). This is reminiscent of the situation in children with CBL syndrome and JMML whose myeloproliferation spontaneously improves.8 Notably, the AML in our patient exhibited an additional gain of 11q material, indicating that the LOH had existed before the AML. In skin and T lymphocytes, 11q retained heterozygosity.  View inlineView popup Table 1 Chromosome 11q aberrations assessed by single nucleotide polymorphism array and CBL D390V allele burden determined by sequencing in different cell populations To complement the LOH findings, we determined the allelic burden of the CBL mutation by pyrosequencing (Table 1). In agreement with the LOH data, the mutation was heterozygous in skin and T lymphocytes but homozygous in AML cells and in granulocytes, monocytes, and B lymphocytes collected during CR, where it remained homozygous until last follow-up, underlining the stability of the genetically aberrant hematopoiesis. Notably, LOH and pyrosequencing data suggested the presence of a small fraction of T lymphocytes also harboring the 11q-LOH (Table 1 and supplemental Figure 2).  Identification of cooperating mutations by whole-exome sequencing  Similar to our patient, children with CBL syndrome and transient JMML feature normal blood counts and persistent homozygous CBL mutation in their hematopoiesis.8 Little is known about mechanisms that could be responsible for normal hematopoiesis despite oncogenic features characteristic of JMML. We wondered whether this was associated with the acquisition of mutations that overcome the myeloproliferative impact of the homozygous CBL mutation. We therefore subjected granulocytes from CR and skin to whole-exome sequencing but identified no additional mutations.  We also performed whole-exome sequencing of AML cells to identify mutations that were acquired during AML development, in addition to inv(16) and 11q-gain. We detected somatic mutations in 12 genes (Table 2), three of which (CAND1, NID2, PTPRT) were previously found mutated in AML.20⇓-22 However, no gene has an established role in leukemogenesis (eg, as cooperating partner of mutant CBL or CBFB-MYH11).  View inlineView popup Table 2 Gene mutations in AML acquired in addition to the germline CBL mutation and the chromosomal aberrations Biological impact of the CBL mutation  JMML features the formation of colonies at low concentrations of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF).23 We observed no spontaneous growth or hypersensitivity to GM-CSF of mononuclear cells collected from our patient during CR (data not shown), which underlines the lacking or only subtle impact of the homozygous CBL mutation on hematopoiesis. Moreover, granulocytes showed normal production of reactive oxygen species and interleukin-8 to stimuli, and adhesion and migration/chemotaxis were normal (data not shown).  In summary, we diagnosed a CBL syndrome in an adult, who, as observed in children with CBL syndrome developing JMML,8,10 had lost the CBL WT allele in the bone marrow. Whether this leads to overt JMML only under certain circumstances is not well understood.24 Because the LOH persisted in the various hematopoietic cell lineages in our patient, it likely conferred a clonal advantage at one point. Thus, the patient may have indeed gone through a JMML or related hematologic disorder during infancy, which spontaneously resolved. However, medical information to support this assumption is unavailable. Following the hypothesis that normal blood counts in our patient could be associated with the acquisition of mutations counterbalancing the mutant CBL, we performed whole-exome sequencing but identified no acquired mutations. On the background of the CBL mutation, the patient developed AML through the acquisition of inv(16), gain of 11q-material, and at least 12 gene mutations. The AML was eradicated by chemotherapy, leaving a hematopoiesis with homozygous CBL mutation.  Although the CBL syndrome is known to predispose to JMML, this is the first description of a different myeloid neoplasia occurring at adult age. It cannot be determined whether the AML was mere coincidence or caused by a predisposition conferred by the CBL mutation. However, the latter is supported by the specific gain of CBL-encoding 11q-material, and occurrence of inv(16), which associates with CBL mutations.11⇓⇓-14 If substantiated by future studies, the association between CBL syndrome and AML should be considered in clinical practice. CBL would then join other genes (eg, RUNX1 or CEBPA) with germline mutations that were linked to a predisposition to AML.25  Overall, the case highlights the possibility of genetically aberrant hematopoiesis despite normal blood counts and provides insight into myeloid neoplasias in the CBL syndrome. Because of potential health problems associated with a CBL syndrome, germline analyses may be generally warranted in younger adults with CBL-mutated neoplasias.
47||The receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase T (PTPRT/PTPρ) is the most frequently mutated tyrosine phosphatase in human cancer. PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation. In its extracellular region, PTPρ has cell adhesion molecule-like motifs, including a MAM domain, an immunoglobulin domain and four fibronectin type III (FNIII) repeats. Tumor-derived mutations have been identified in all of these extracellular domains. Previously, we determined that tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and immunoglobulin domains of PTPρ reduce homophilic cell-cell aggregation. In this manuscript, we describe experiments in which we evaluated the contribution of the FNIII repeats to PTPρ-mediated cell-cell adhesion. Our results demonstrate that deletion of the FNIII repeats of PTPρ result in defective cell-cell aggregation. Furthermore, all of the tumor-derived mutations in the FNIII repeats of PTPρ also disrupt cell-cell aggregation. These results further support the hypothesis that mutational inactivation of PTPρ may lead to cancer progression by disrupting cell-cell adhesion.  Keywords: Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase, PTPRT, PTPρ, fibronectin type III repeat, cell-cell aggregation, cell-cell adhesion Go to: 1. Introduction Cancer progression and metastasis is in part influenced by changes in cell adhesion and tyrosine phosphorylation mediated by cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) (Paschos et al. 2009; Wheelock et al. 2008), as well as tyrosine kinases and tyrosine phosphatases, respectively (Freiss and Vignon 2004; Ostman et al. 2006). Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatases (RPTPs) comprise a family of proteins that have extracellular CAM domains coupled to cytoplasmic tyrosine phosphatase domains, and thus can impact cancer progression by regulating both cell adhesion and tyrosine phosphorylation (Brady-Kalnay 2001; Ostman et al. 2006).  The type IIB PTPμ-like subfamily of RPTPs includes PTPμ, PTPρ, PTPκ, and PCP-2 (PTPλ) (Aricescu et al. 2008; Brady-Kalnay 2001). The extracellular segment of the PTPμ-like RPTPs contain motifs found in CAMs, including a MAM domain, an immunoglobulin (Ig) domain and four fibronectin type III (FNIII) repeats (Aricescu et al. 2008; Brady-Kalnay 2001; Ostman et al. 2006). PTPμ subfamily members bind homophilically (i.e. the “ligand” for PTPμ is an identical PTPμ molecule on an adjacent cell) (Brady-Kalnay et al. 1993; Cheng et al. 1997; Gebbink et al. 1993; Sap et al. 1994; Yu et al. 2008; Zondag et al. 1995). The Ig domain of PTPμ is responsible for promoting homophilic interactions (Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994), and proper cell surface localization (Del Vecchio and Tonks 2005). However, both the MAM and Ig domains as well as the first two FNIII repeats are required for efficient cell-cell adhesion of PTPμ (Aricescu et al. 2006; Aricescu et al. 2007; Aricescu et al. 2008; Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Cismasiu et al. 2004; Zondag et al. 1995). PTPρ and PTPκ also mediate homophilic cell-cell adhesion (Sap et al. 1994; Yu et al. 2008). However, PCP2 has not yet been demonstrated to mediate cell-cell adhesion or aggregation although in vitro binding studies indicate it can bind homophilically (Cheng et al. 1997).  All type IIB RPTPs are potential tumor suppressor genes (Burgoyne et al. 2009a; Flavell et al. 2008; McArdle et al. 2001; Yan et al. 2006). Notably, PTPρ is the most frequently mutated phosphatase gene in human cancers including colon, lung, skin and stomach cancers (Forbes et al. 2008; Wang et al. 2004). Defective adhesion mediated by PTPρ may be at least one mechanism of cancer progression. In fact, cancer derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ are defective in mediating cell-cell aggregation (Yu et al. 2008).  In addition to the tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ previously described (Wang et al. 2004; Yu et al. 2008), the majority of extracellular domain mutations are located in the FNIII repeats of PTPρ (Wang et al. 2004). Given the importance of FNIII repeats in PTPμ-mediated adhesion and aggregation (Aricescu et al. 2007), we tested the contribution of the FNIII repeats of PTPρ to PTPρ-mediated adhesion. We determined that deletion constructs where each of the extracellular domains of PTPρ is removed, including the FNIII repeats, are defective in mediating cell-cell aggregation of Sf9 cells. Furthermore, when we engineered the cancer-derived mutations in the FNIII repeats of these PTPρ mutant proteins, they also result in defective cell-cell aggregation. These results demonstrate the importance of the FNIII repeats in contributing to proper cell-cell adhesion and suggest that adhesion mediated by PTPρ is likely important for the tumor suppressor activity of PTPρ.  Go to: 2. Materials and methods 2.1 Baculovirus generation  Baculoviruses were generated by transfecting cells with the BaculoGold™ Linearized Baculovirus DNA (BD Biosciences, San Diego, CA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The baculovirus for wild-type PTPρ was previously described (Yu et al. 2008).  2.2 Sf9 cell culture  Insect Sf9 cells from (BD Biosciences) were maintained at 27°C in Graces Insect Medium (BD Biosciences). The medium was supplemented with 10% FBS from (Hyclone, Logan, UT) and Gentamicin (MP Biomedicals, Solon, OH). Viruses were added to Sf9 cell medium to induce the expression of proteins of interest. Cells were harvested 30 hours post-infection for further analysis.  2.3 Generation of PTPRT deletion constructs  The PTPρ-ΔMAM, PTPρ-ΔIg, PTPρ-ΔFNIII-1, PTPρ-ΔFNIII-2, PTPρ-ΔFNIII-3 and PTPρ-ΔFNIII-4 constructs were generated by fusion PCR using the full-length PTPRT pVL1393-V5-His vector as the template. The primers 5’-GAAGATCTATGGCGAGCCTCGCCGCG-3’ and 5’-CCGGAATTCGGATCCTGGGGCGCTCTGAGCCCGGG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔMAM construct; the primers 5’-GCGTGGGAGGCTCTCTGCATGGATGAGCAAGGAC-3’ and 5’-CAATGGGTCTTGCTCATCCATGCAGAGAGCCTCCCACGCCCATTG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔIg construct; the primers 5’-CTGCACACTTGGTCCTGGTTTTCACGATCAGCTCCGCGTA-3’ and 5’-TACGCGGAGCGTCGTGAAAACCAGGACCAAGTGTGCAG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-1 construct; the primers 5’-CCGCCAGGGCCTCCCCTCACCGAGGAAGACGTTCCAGGAG-3’ and 5’-CTCCTGGAACGTCTTCCTCGGTGAGGGGAGGCCCTGGCGG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-2 construct; the primers 5’-GAGGAGCTGGTGGTGCAGACTAAAATTTCAGCTCCATCCA-3’ and 5’-TGGATGGAGCTGAAATTTTAGTCTGCACCACCAGCTCCTC-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-3 construct and the 5’-GTCACCACTCGGATTGCCACCGGTGCCTCCACCCAGAATT-3’ and 5’-AATTCTGGGTGGAGGCACCGGTGGCAATCCGAGTGGTGAC-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-4 construct.  2.4 Immunoblotting  Sf9 cells were lysed in a standard lysis buffer (20 mM Tris·HCl, pH 7.5, 1% Triton X-100, 150 mM sodium chloride, 2 mM Benzamidine, 2.5μg/ml Aprotinin, 2.5μg/ml Leupeptin, and 0.5μg/ml Pepstatin). Samples were solubilized in 2X SDS loading buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE. Samples were transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (Whatman, Piscataway, NJ) and immunoblotted with SK18 (Brady-Kalnay et al. 1993), which cross-reacts with PTPρ.  2.5 Cell surface expression of PTPρ  Cell surface expression of PTPρ protein in baculovirus infected Sf9 cells was determined using a modified biotin-avidin reaction with the Cell Surface Protein Isolation Kit (catalog# 89991, Pierce, Rockford, IL), as previously described (Yu et al. 2008). Briefly, Sf9 cell media was removed and the flasks were incubated with rocking for 30 minutes at 4°C in 5ml of 0.25mg/ml Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin in 1X PBS. The cells were mechanically removed from the flask, centrifuged, washed, and lysed according to the manufacturer’s protocols. To isolate cell surface expressed PTPρ the cell lysate was added to a NeutrAvidin Gel column and incubated for 60 min at room temperature (RT) with rocking prior to washing and eluting proteins with 200μl of sample buffer containing a final concentration of 55mM DTT for 60min at RT. The flow through was run on 6% SDS-PAGE gels and transferred to nitrocellulose. Total cell surface protein levels were normalized by immunoblotting cell lysates with an anti-actin antibody (JLA20). The normalized cell surface protein was run on 6% SDS-PAGE gels, transferred to nitrocellulose and immunoblotted with antibodies to PTPμ that also recognized PTPρ (SK18) followed by secondary antibody conjugated to HRP. The HRP signal was detected using a Fluor-S MAX MultiImager (Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc., Hercules, CA).  2.6 Aggregation Assays  Sf9 cells were harvested by trituration. The cell suspensions were added to glass scintillation vials and incubated at 27°C at 90 rpm in a gyratory shaker for 30 minutes. For a given condition, the cell suspension was transferred to a 100mm petri dish either prior to (0 time point) or 30 minutes after aggregation. Images were captured at 10X magnification with a Nikon TE-200 inverted fluorescent microscope (Tokyo, Japan). To quantify cell aggregates, pictures of four randomly selected fields were taken per dish. The area of each object (single cells and aggregates) was determined by the Metamorph software (Molecular Devices) using an auto-threshold setting for light objects and appropriate size filters that allowed the counting of cells and aggregates but not debris. The four replicates were combined to yield average readings per condition. The percent aggregation was then calculated as the average aggregate area at 30 minutes minus the average aggregate area at zero minutes divided by the average aggregate area at 30 minutes [(N30-N0)/N30]. A minimum of three independent experiments was performed per condition. Statistical significance was determined in Microsoft Excel using Student’s T-test. Error bars indicate standard error.  2.7 Site-directed mutagenesis  The I395V, Y412F, R453C, Q479E, S492F, N510K, T605M, V648G, A707T, and L708P tumor-derived mutations (Wang et al. 2004) were generated by fusion PCR using the full-length PTPRT pVL1393-V5-His vector as the template. The primers 5’-TGGCCCACAGAACGTGGAAGTCGTAGACATCAGAGCC-3’ and 5’-CTTCCACGTTCTGTGGGCCA-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the I395V mutant; the primers 5’-CAGTGGGAGCCCTTCGGCTTCGCGGTGACCCGCTGCCAT-3’ and 5’-AAGCCGAAGGGCTCCCACTG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the Y412F mutant; the primers 5’-CTACACCCTGCGAGGCCTGTGCCCCTTCATGACCATCCG-3’ and 5’-ACAGGCCTCGCAGGGTGTAG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the R453C mutant; the primers 5’-GAGCGAGGAGCTGGTGGTGGAGACTGAGGAAGACGTTCC-3’ and 5’-CCACCACCAGCTCCTCGCTC-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the Q479E mutant; the primers 5’-TGTTCCTCTAGAATTCATCCAAGGGGGGCCCT TT-3’ and 5’-ATGAATTCTAGAGGAACA-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the S492F mutant; the primers 5’-TCCAGTGGAAACCTCCCAAGGAGACCAATGGGGTCATCA-3’ and 5’-CTTGGGAGGTTTCCACTGGA-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the N510K mutant; the primers 5’-CCATTGAATGAGACAGACATGACC ATCACAGTGATGCTG3-’ and 5’-ATGTCTGTCTCATTCAATGG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the T605M mutant; the primers 5’-ATTATTGAGTGCTTTTC GGGGCCCGTGAGCTATCGGAAT-3’ and 5’-CCCGAAAAGCACTCAATAAT-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the V648G mutant; the primers 5’-CTACAGCATCTACTTCCAGACACTCAGCAAAGCCAATGG-3’ and 5’-TCTGGAAGTAGATGCTGTAG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the A707T mutant; the primers 5’-AGCATCTACTTCCAGGCACCCAGCAAAGCCAATGGAGAG-3’ and 5’-GGTGCCTGGAAGTAGATGCT-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the L708P mutant.  2.8 Mapping of PTPρ mutations onto the PTPμ crystal structure  The sequence of PTPμ and PTPρ were aligned using CLUSTALW. Mutations probed in this study were mapped using this sequence alignment onto the PTPμ structure (PDB ID: 2V5Y). The figure was prepared utilizing PyMOL 1.2r1 (http://pymol.org).  Go to: 3. Results 3.1 Deletions in the MAM, Ig, and FNIII repeat domains of PTPρ result in defective cell-cell aggregation  To test whether a protein mediates cell-cell aggregation or adhesion, one has to express the protein of interest in the non-adhesive cells. Otherwise, one cannot measure the aggregation or adhesion of a single molecule in the sea of other adhesion molecules naturally expressed in adhesive cells. This is the main reason that the non-adhesive Sf9 or Drosophila S2 cells are widely used models for such studies. To our knowledge, nearly all cell lines of epithelial origin are adhesive cells and thus are not suitable for these studies. Introduction of putative adhesion molecules into non-adhesive Drosophila S2 insect cells has been used to demonstrate adhesive functions for fasciclin II, connectin, Dtrk, ARK, Neuroglian, and Capricious molecules directly (Bellosta et al. 1995; Hortsch et al. 1995; Nose et al. 1992; Pulido et al. 1992; Shinza-Kameda et al. 2006; Snow et al. 1989). In a similar approach, we and others demonstrated that the full-length form of PTPμ induced aggregation, via a homophilic binding mechanism, when expressed in nonadhesive Sf9 insect cells, which are derived from the Fall army-worm Spodoptera frugiperda (Brady-Kalnay et al. 1993; Gebbink et al. 1993; Zondag et al. 1995). We have also used this system for analyzing PTPRT/PTP rho (Yu et al., 2008). Examples of other cell adhesion molecules that have been studied in Sf9 cells include L1 (Gouveia et al. 2008), Galectin-3 (Inohara and Raz 1995) and C-CAM1 (Phan et al. 2001). Insect S2 and Sf9 cells are extremely useful systems to analyze adhesive mechanisms of cell adhesion molecules.  The MAM domain, Ig domain, and first two-FNIII repeats are essential for PTPμ cell-cell aggregation (Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Zondag et al. 1995). To test whether these domains are the minimal essential regions required for PTPρ cell-cell aggregation, baculoviral PTPρ deletion constructs of the MAM domain, Ig domain, and each of the four individual FNIII repeats were made and expressed in non-adhesive Sf9 insect cells (Figure 1). All the PTPρ deletion constructs were expressed and appropriately trafficked to the cell surface (Figure 1). To test whether these domains contribute to PTPρ-dependent adhesion, Sf9 cells were evaluated for their ability to mediate cell-cell aggregation when expressing the deletion constructs. Aggregation assays with Sf9 cells expressing the deletion constructs were conducted alongside aggregation assays using Sf9 cells expressing wild-type PTPρ, which mediates cell-cell aggregation (Figure 2) and serves as a positive control (Yu et al. 2008). Deletion of any of the extracellular domains of PTPρ resulted in defective cell-cell aggregation compared to aggregation of wild-type PTPρ expressing Sf9 cells (Figure 2). Deletion of the fourth FNIII repeat was the least severe where ~23% aggregation was observed. Deletion of the MAM domain, Ig domain and FNIII repeats 1, 2 or 3 resulted in 5–16% aggregation. When the level of aggregation was quantified, we determined that all of the deletion constructs resulted in a large and statistically significant reduction in cell-cell aggregation (Figure 2, p-value<0.005). Together with our previous study, these results demonstrate that all of the extracellular domains of PTPρ are necessary for PTPρ-mediated cell-cell aggregation.  Figure 1 Figure 1 PTPρ deletion constructs are all expressed at the cell surface. Constructs containing deletions of one extracellular domain of PTPρ each were generated and expressed in Sf9 cells. Total cellular protein and cell surface protein were isolated ... Figure 2 Figure 2 Deletion of any of the extracellular domains of PTPρ disrupts cell-cell aggregation. Sf9 cells expressing deletion constructs of the individual extracellular domains of PTPρ were allowed to aggregate for 30 minutes prior to imaging. Scale ... 3.2 Tumor-Derived PTPρ Mutations in the FNIII repeats result in defective cell-cell aggregation  We next tested the effects of human tumor-derived mutations in the FNIII repeats of PTPρ on PTPρ-mediated cell-cell aggregation. We recently demonstrated that tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ are defective in cell-cell aggregation using the Sf9 aggregation assay (Yu et al. 2008), and given the above results, we hypothesized that mutations in the FNIII domains would likewise result in defective aggregation. Ten human tumor-derived mutations are located in the second, third and fourth FNIII repeats of PTPρ (Wang et al. 2004). To test whether these mutations also affect cell-cell aggregation, we engineered the ten human mutations by site-directed mutagenesis using the full-length PTPρ baculoviral construct as a template (see Figure 3). The ten mutations are expressed in Sf9 cells at the expected molecular weight and at similar levels to full-length human PTPρ (Figure 3). All of these mutants are expressed at the cell surface (Figure 3). When these mutant PTPρ proteins were expressed in Sf9 cells and tested in aggregation assays, we observed that all of the mutant PTPρ proteins resulted in fewer and smaller aggregates than wild type PTPρ (Figure 4). When the level of aggregation was quantified, we determined that all of the FNIII mutations significantly reduced cell-cell aggregation (16–43%) compared to cells expressing wild type PTPρ (68% aggregation, p-value<0.008, Figure 4).  Figure 3 Figure 3 PTPρ proteins containing tumor-derived mutations in their FNIII domains are expressed at the cell surface. Ten mutations in the FNIII domains of PTPρ were generated by site-directed mutagenesis and expressed in Sf9 cells. Total cellular ... Figure 4 Figure 4 Tumor derived mutations in FNIII domains of PTPρ are defective in cell-cell aggregation. Sf9 cells expressing the mutated PTPρ proteins were allowed to aggregate for 30 minutes prior to imaging. Scale bar equals 100μm. The percentage ... Go to: 4. Discussion PTPRT/PTPρ is the most highly mutated tyrosine phosphatase in human colon carcinomas. We and others found that PTPRT/ PTPρ is also mutated in lung, gastric and skin (melanoma) cancers (Forbes et al. 2008; Wang et al. 2004). The spectrum of mutations, which included nonsense mutations and frameshifts, suggested that these mutations were inactivating (Wang et al. 2004). Biochemical analyses demonstrated that missense mutations in the catalytic domains of PTPRT diminished its phosphatase activity and overexpression of PTPRT inhibited colon cancer cell growth. Moreover, we showed previously that the tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ are defective in cell-cell adhesion (Yu et al. 2008). All these data suggest that PTPRT/PTPρ normally functions as a tumor suppressor gene. The experiments presented in this manuscript evaluate the contribution of the individual extracellular domains of PTPρ to PTPρ-mediated adhesion. We demonstrate that in addition to the MAM and Ig domains, the FNIII repeats are required for PTPρ-mediated adhesion. Importantly, we also show that PTPρ-mediated adhesion is impaired by human tumor-derived mutations in those FNIII repeats. These studies indicate that all the tumor-derived mutations located in the extracellular domain of PTPRT are loss-of-function mutations, thereby providing further evidence that PTPRT is a tumor suppressor. This notion is further supported by our recent study showing that PTPRT knockout mice are highly susceptible to colon specific carcinogen azoxymethane (AOM)-induced colon cancer (Zhao et al.).  PTPμ-mediated cell-cell aggregation requires the MAM domain, Ig domain, and the first two FNIII repeats (Aricescu et al. 2006; Aricescu et al. 2007; Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Cismasiu et al. 2004; Zondag et al. 1995). The entire extracellular domain of PTPμ is predicted to make a rigid conformation with extensive interfaces between each of the domains (Aricescu et al. 2006). The minimal adhesive unit for functional cell-cell aggregation is the MAM domain, Ig domain and the first two FNIII repeats (Aricescu et al. 2006; Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Zondag et al. 1995). However, the FNIII repeats appear to play a role in spacing the key homophilic interaction domain(s) a certain distance from the plasma membrane. Deletion of the FNIII repeats changed the intercellular spacing of two apposing membranes (Aricescu et al. 2007). Cell-cell aggregation assays of the FNIII deletion constructs were not performed in that study (Aricescu et al. 2007). The amino acid residues of the interfaces between the extracellular domains are highly conserved between members of the type IIB RPTP subfamily (Aricescu et al. 2006; Aricescu et al. 2007) therefore it is likely that the PTPρ adhesive interface resembles that of PTPμ. Together our data support the hypothesis that the essential regions for PTPρ-mediated adhesion resemble those of PTPμ.  To gain insight into how the point mutations may alter the adhesive function of PTPρ, we modeled the human tumor derived PTPρ mutations onto the crystal structure of PTPμ (Figure 5). The crystal structure of PTPμ includes only the first three FNIII repeats (Aricescu et al. 2007). Four of these mutations fall within the second FNIII (FNIII-2) repeat (I395V, Y412F, R453C, Q479E). It is important to note that FNIII-2 is required for efficient cell-cell adhesion (Aricescu et al. 2006). Two of the mutations fall in the third FNIII (FNIII-3) repeat (S492F, N510K). The mutation within the linker region between FNIII-1 and FNII-2 (Y412F) could alter the flexibility or positioning between the two domains. The other mutations (I395V R453C, Q479E, S492F, N510K) appear to be clustered in surface exposed regions and/or near the linker regions between FNIII-2 and FNIII-3 that could alter flexibility, position of individual FNIII repeats and/or protein-protein interactions. While these mutations do not correspond to the adhesive interface hypothesized for PTPμ based upon a single static crystal structure (Aricescu et al. 2007), some of the mutations fall within the FNIII-2 repeat which is required for adhesion, and all of these surface modifications would likely alter either the three-dimensional topology and/or cis/trans interactions of PTPρ.  Figure 5 Figure 5 Structural modeling of the point mutations of PTPρ. The point mutations (indicated in red) evaluated in this manuscript were modeled onto the equivalent sites in the crystal structure of PTPμ. The PTPρ mutations likely alter cell-cell ... Other type IIB RPTPs also function as tumor suppressor genes, by regulating adhesion and/or tyrosine phosphorylation of effector proteins. Expression of PTPμ is reduced in human glioblastomas (GBM) and cell lines (Burgoyne et al. 2009a). Reduction in full-length PTPμ expression with a concomitant increase in a proteolytically processed cytoplasmic fragment of PTPμ is observed in GBM cells and both are correlated with decreased adhesion and increased migration observed in the disease (Burgoyne et al. 2009a; Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Over-expression of the full-length form of PTPμ suppressed migration of GBM cells and reduces their survival (Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Of note, at the same time that stable cell adhesion is reduced due to the loss of full-length PTPμ expression in GBM cells, a catalytically active cytoplasmic fragment of PTPμ is released and translocates to the nucleus (Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Catalytic activity of this fragment is also necessary for cell migration and viability of GBM cells (Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Therefore, both the tyrosine phosphatase activity of the cytoplasmic fragment of PTPμ and the loss of PTPμ-mediated adhesion may contribute to the invasiveness of GBM cells.  PTPκ is also implicated in tumor progression. PTPκ expression is reduced in melanoma cell lines and human tissue biopsies (McArdle et al. 2001), and in Hodgkin’s lymphoma cells (Flavell et al. 2008). Over-expression of PTPκ in Hodgkin lymphoma cells reduces cellular proliferation and survival (Flavell et al. 2008). Like PTPμ, PTPκ is proteolytically processed (Anders et al. 2006), potentially as a result of aberrant glycosylation (Kim et al. 2006). It is not clear whether adhesion or catalytic activity of PTPκ is required for its tumor suppressor activity (Flavell et al. 2008; Kim et al. 2006). Of note, the cleaved cytoplasmic domain fragment of PTPκ is catalytically active, translocates to the nucleus and promotes β-catenin-mediated transcription (Anders et al. 2006). Signaling via the PTPκ cytoplasmic fragment might augment the loss of stable cell-cell adhesion and may promote tumor progression.  Although speculative, it is interesting to postulate that tyrosine phosphatase activity and or cleavage of PTPρ will also be an important element of its tumor suppressor activity, as has been demonstrated for PTPμ and PTPκ. Interestingly, we identified and validated STAT3 as a direct substrate of PTPRT (Zhang et al. 2007). STAT3 is latent transcription factor that translocates from the cytoplasm to the nucleus after being phosphorylated at the Y705 residue. It is possible that the cleaved intracellular fragment of PTPρ, which contains the phosphatase domains, translocates to nucleus and dephosphorylates STAT3. Besco and colleagues found that PTPRT associates with the adhesion molecule E-cadherin and its binding partner p120 catenin, which are PTPRT substrates (Besco et al. 2006). p120 also translocates to the nucleus and associates with the Kaiso transcription factor (Daniel and Reynolds 1999). Given the frequency and distribution of mutations in PTPRT/PTPρ in human colon and other cancers, a more thorough understanding of its biological function is warranted.
48||Metastasis is the leading cause of death for gastric carcinoma (GC). An epigenetic biomarker panel for predicting GC metastasis could have significant clinical impact on the care of GC patients. The main purpose of this study is to characterize the methylation differences between GCs with and without metastasis.  Experimental Design  Genome-wide DNA methylation profiles between 4 metastatic and 4 non-metastatic GCs and their surgical margins (SM) were analyzed using methylated-CpG island amplification with microarray. The methylation states of 73 candidate genes were further analyzed in GC patients in a discovery cohort (n=108) using DHPLC, bisulfite-sequencing, and MethyLight. The predictive values of potential metastasis-methylation biomarkers were validated in GC patient cohorts in China (n=330), Japan (n=129), and Korea (n=153).  Results  The GC genome showed significantly higher proportions of hypomethylation in the promoter and exon-1 regions, as well as increased hypermethylation of intragenic fragments when compared to SMs. Significant differential methylation was validated in the CGIs of 15 genes (Ps<0.05) and confirmed using bisulfite-sequencing. These genes included BMP3, BNIP3, CDKN2A, ECEL1, ELK1, GFRA1, HOXD10, KCNH1, PSMD10, PTPRT, SIGIRR, SRF, TBX5, TFPI2, and ZNF382. Methylation changes of GFRA1, SRF and ZNF382 resulted in up- or down-regulation of their transcription. Most importantly, the prevalence of GFRA1, SRF, and ZNF382 methylation alterations was consistently and coordinately associated with GC metastasis and the patients’ overall survival throughout discovery and validation cohorts in China, Japan and Korea.  Conclusion  Methylation changes of GFRA1, SRF, and ZNF382 may be a potential biomarker set for prediction of GC metastasis.  Keywords: gastric cancer, metastasis, DNA methylation Go to: Introduction Gastric carcinoma (GC) is the second leading cause of cancer death throughout the world (1). Global statistics showed that in 2008 alone, nearly 989,000 people were diagnosed with GC, and approximately 464,000 people died from this disease (2). Currently, GC prognosis is primarily determined based on the clinical data and pathological stages of patients at the time of diagnosis and treatment (3). However, successful management of GC patients is still hampered by the lack of highly sensitive and specific biomarkers capable of predicting prognosis and likelihood of metastasis. Epigenetic alterations, including aberrant DNA methylation changes, may play an important role in gastric carcinogenesis as indicated by the increased hypermethylation of tumor suppressor genes in GC patients (4–6). Given their important functions in cancer initiation and progression, methylation changes are being investigated as potential biomarkers for the early detection of cancers, the prediction of cancer progression, and the prediction of chemotherapeutic sensitivity (7).  Recent advances in high-throughput technologies have significantly expanded our capability of interrogating genome-wide DNA methylation changes in cancer (6, 8, 9). Methylated-CpG island amplification with microarray (MCAM) is one of the most powerful tools available for displaying differential methylation related to pathogenesis (10). A number of DNA methylome studies have been reported in a variety of primary cancers, including GC. However, few studies have been conducted to vigorously validate the methylation changes of the candidate genes at the single molecule level in numerous tumor samples (6, 11). Therefore, despite the long list of differentially methylated genes in GC patients, a promising DNA methylation biomarker has not yet reached to the clinical utility.  In the present study, genome-wide DNA methylation analysis using the MCAM assay was performed in GCs (10). A large number of differentially methylated regions were identified between GCs and their corresponding surgical margin (SM). In addition, differential methylation profiles between metastatic and non-metastatic GCs were identified. Most importantly, the methylation status of promoter CpG islands (CGIs) from 73 candidate genes was characterized using denatured high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) in 48 pairs of gastric samples from GC and non-cancer patients (12). The predictive values of three potential metastasis-related candidates were further validated in multiple cohorts from China, Japan, and Korea following the Reporting Prognostic Tumor Marker Study (REMARK) guidelines. We demonstrated that the methylation status of GFRA1, SRF and ZNF382 could be used as potential synergistic biomarkers for the prediction of GC metastasis.  Go to: Materials and Methods Patient characteristics and sample collection  A total of 504 patients with GC from 3 academic medical centers in China, Japan, and Korea were included in this study. The study was approved by the local Institution Review Boards (IRB) at each institution, and all patients were given written informed consent unless the IRB permitted a waiver. The 2003 UICC-TNM (tumor-node-metastasis) system was used for the classification of GCs (13). 330 Chinese GC inpatients that underwent surgical treatment at Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute between 1999 and 2006 were enrolled in the discovery and validation cohorts based on the following criteria: a) availability of frozen, fresh GC and SM samples; b) follow-up available for at least 5 years; c) falls into the proper pathological TNM (pTNM) stages as described in the results section. In the validation cohort from Korea, 153 GC inpatients that received surgical treatment were selected from Seoul National University Hospital during 2004 with a follow-up of at least 3 years. Paraffin-embedded SM samples were used in the Korea study. The validation cohort from Japan included 78 GC inpatients that acquired surgical treatment between 1995 and 2002 with a follow-up of at least 5 years, as well as an additional 79 GC patients between 2010 and 2011 who did not have survival data. The SM samples were not available for these Japanese patients. GCs were classified as cardiac or non-cardiac in terms of location (14). Patients with pre-operative chemotherapy were not included in the discovery or independent validation cohorts. Normal/gastritis biopsies (NorG) from 56 outpatients at Peking University Cancer Hospital were used as the cancer-free controls.  Study design  The discovery patient cohort from Peking University Cancer Hospital consisted of 54 randomly selected patients with non-metastatic GCs and 54 matched patients with distant metastatic GCs. Among them, 8 paired GC and the corresponding SM samples from patients with or without distant and lymph metastasis were analyzed using MCAM on a customized Agilent promoter array. The clinical and histological features of these 8 patients can be found in Supplementary Table S1. The remaining GC and SM samples from 100 patients were used for the characterization of 73 CGIs using DHPLC and bisulfite clone sequencing. The methylation states of the three most promising candidate CGIs were analyzed in three analogous independent validation cohorts from China (n=222), Japan (n=129), and Korea (n=153). The overall study design is outlined in Supplementary Fig. S1. Genomic DNA was isolated using phenol/chloroform extraction.  Cell lines and culture  MKN74 cell line was kindly provided by Dr. Yasuhito Yuasa at Tokyo Medical and Dental University in 2010; RKO cell line, from Dr. Guoren Deng, at University California in San Francisco in 2001; AGS, by Dr. Chengchao Shou in 2009, HeLa and MGC803, by Dr. Yang Ke in 2004, at Peking University Cancer Hospital. All cells were grown in monolayer in appropriate medium supplemented with 10% FBS and maintained at 37°C in humidified air with 5% CO2. These cell lines were tested and authenticated by Beijing JianLian Genes Technology Co., LTD before they were used in this study. STR patterns were analyzed using Goldeneye™20A STR Identifiler PCR Amplification Kit. Gene Mapper v3.2 software (ABI) was used to match the STR pattern with the online databases of National Platform of Experimental Cell Resources for Sci-Tech for MGC803 cell and the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) for other cells.  Genome-wide analysis of DNA methylation in GC tissues using MCAM  Genomic DNA (2 μg) from 8 pairs of fresh GC and SM samples was analyzed using the MCAM approach (10). Briefly, genomic DNA was digested consecutively with SmaI and XmaI which cut unmethylated and methylated CCCGGG sites, respectively. The XmaI digestion produces sticky ends that can be ligated to linkers, while SmaI digestion results in blunt ends that are unable to be ligated to linkers. The ligation-mediated PCR products from GC and SM samples were purified and labeled with Alexafluor647 or 555, respectively, using the Bioprime Plus Array CGH Indirect Genomic Labeling kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturers’ instructions. The labeled DNA was co-hybridized to a custom designed Agilent Oligonucleotide Array, and the slides were washed and scanned as described previously (15). Data was extracted using the Feature Extraction Tool (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) and exported for further analysis. The custom designed Agilent oligonucleotide array was designed using Agilent eArray service (https://earray.chem.agilent.com/earray). The array consisted of approximately 99,028 probes (44–60mers) that covered 29,879 in silico SmaI-digested DNA fragments (>60bp and <2000bp) in the human genome. The probes were tiled within each fragment with 100bp spacing. The methylation states of 6177 genes were determined using this custom methylation array.  Microarray data normalization and probe/gene selection  The raw array data was processed and normalized by the Beijing CO-FLY Bioinformatic Company. Background model adjustment was carried out using the minimum normalization algorithm. Systematic differences between arrays were normalized using the quantile method as described (16, 17). The methylation array data, as well as the probe information, have been deposited into the Gene Expression Omnibus under accession number GSE47724.  The mean intensity of the normalized array hybridization (methylation) signal of each probe for sex-related chromosomes and autosomes in the SM samples from 4 males and 4 females (Supplementary Fig. S2A–C) were analyzed. As expected, the intensities of 784 of 2390 X chromosome-probes (32.8%) were significantly higher in the female samples than the male samples (Student’s t-test, P<0.05); in contrast, 35 of 87 Y chromosome-probes (40.2%) were significantly higher in the male samples when compared to the female samples. These sex-specific differences were only observed in 1250 of 96,550 (1.3%) probes in the 22 autosomes. These results confirmed that the quality of the normalized data is sufficient to differentiate sex-specific DNA methylation and suitable for studying GC- or metastasis-related methylation changes.  The methylation signal ratio ([GC]/[SM]) was calculated for each array probe. The Student’s paired t-test (P<0.01) was used to identify the differentially methylated probes between GC and SM samples from the 8 patients analyzed. The Mann-Whitney U-test (P<0.029) was used to identify the metastasis-specific differentially methylated probes between the 4 metastatic and 4 non-metastatic GC patients. The methylation ratio data including the adjusted P-values for each probe are included in the data file S1.  The difference between GC-related hypermethylated and hypomethylated probes was calculated for each sliding window (sequence or region) using 51 probe-matched fragments, which included the target probe along with 25 probes both upstream and downstream of the target. Probes near the centromeres and telomeres of each chromosome were not included due to the absence of the 25 upstream or downstream probes. The numerical differences for 99K probes were charted to display the detailed regional methylation trend (or net methylation signal) for the corresponding chromosome arm.  Identification of differentially methylated candidate genes  In order to identify GC and metastasis-specific differentially methylated candidate genes for further evaluation, the promoter and exon-1 regions were focused on due to their known inverse correlation to epigenetic repression of gene transcription. The differentially methylated probes in these regions were defined as the top-100 probes and used in hierarchical clustering analysis and preparation of a heatmap, when their P-values were less than 0.05, and their absolute mean difference-values were within the top 100. Candidate genes were selected from these GC- or metastasis-related probes according to their function information in the public databases.  Hot-start PCR and DHPLC analysis  CpG-free universal primer sets and bisulfite-modified DNA (18) were used to amplify the genes of interest. The PCR reaction mixture (30 μl) included 20 ng DNA template, 0.15 mmol/L dNTP, 0.15 μmol/L of each primer, and 0.9 U of HotStart Taq DNA polymerase (Qiagen GmbH, Hilden, Germany). The PCR products were then analyzed quantitatively by DHPLC using the WAVE® DNA Fragment Analysis System (12, 19). PCR products of hypermethylated and hypomethylated genes were separated using a DNASep® analytical column (Transgenomic) at the corresponding partial denaturing temperature as listed in the supplementary materials and methods). M.SssI-methylated genomic DNA, obtained from blood samples, was used as a positive control. A sample containing a methylated PCR product peak was defined as methylation-positive and used to calculate methylation positive rate [ratio of methylation-positive sample number to total sample number]. The peak areas corresponding to the methylated and unmethylated PCR products were used to calculate the percentage of methylated copies [proportion of hypermethylated copies = methylation-peak area/ total peak area] for each gene analyzed.  MethyLight  The methylation states of GFRA1, SRF, and ZNF382 were determined using the MethyLight assays. Gene-specific probes labeled with 6FAM and TAMRA were employed to quantify the relative copy number of methylated alleles compared to the COL2A1 control (20). The sequences of the primer set and gene-specific probes can be found in the supplementary materials and methods.  Statistical analysis  The SPSS 16.0 Trend-test and Pearson’s Chi-square test were used to analyze the difference in methylation frequency between GC and SM samples and between metastatic and non-metastatic GC samples. Student’s paired t-test, Kruskal-Wallis H-test, and One-Way ANOVA were used to identify differentially methylated regions between the different groups of samples. The Mann-Whitney U-test and Student’s t-test were used to analyze the association between the percentage of methylated copies and the clinicopathological features. All statistical tests were two-sided, and P<0.05 was considered statistically significant. The cutoff value was calculated according to the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve using the percentage of methylated copies to predict GC metastasis. The log-rank test was used to compare survival time between groups. Cox-proportional hazards models were used to identify independent predictors of survival (month) with adjustment for relevant clinical covariates. Functional annotation of the differentially methylated regions was performed using EpiExplorer (21).  Go to: Results Genome-wide analysis of GC-related differential DNA methylation  In order to identify differentially methylated genes related to GC development and metastasis, genome-wide DNA methylation analysis was conducted in 8 pairs of GC and SM samples using the MCAM assay utilizing a 99K custom-designed Agilent oligonucleotide microarray as described above (10). Through this method, 9860 probes in 4047 genes were identified with significant methylation differences between the 8 GC and 8 SM samples (Paired t-test, P<0.01). Of the differentially methylated probes, 4177 showed hypermethylation (42%; [GC]>[SM]), while the remaining probes were hypomethylated (58%; [GC]<[SM]) (Data file S1). Nearly half of the hypomethylated probes (49%) were found to be within a 102~3 bp region of the transcription start site (TSS), while 42% of the hypermethylated probes were within a 103~4 bp region of the TSS (Supplementary Fig. S2D; P<0.0000001). When compared to the hypermethylated probes, the hypomethylated probes showed a considerably higher GC content than the hypermethylated ones (Median, 0.68 vs. 0.50), indicating the hypomethylation lies mainly in typical CGIs (Supplementary Fig. S2E). The promoter and exon-1 regions showed significantly higher proportions of hypomethylation to hypermethylation (26.8% vs. 23.4% for the promoter, P=1.2×10−4; 13.8% vs. 3.0% for exon-1, P=5.5×10−75) in GCs compared to SMs. The opposite trend was seen in the intragenic regions, which showed a significantly lower proportion of hypomethylation to hypermethylation (32.1% vs. 41.5%, P=5.4×10−22) (Fig. 1A). A heatmap displaying the top-100 differentially methylated probes between GCs and SMs in the promoter and exon-1 regions is provided in Fig. 1B.  Figure 1 Figure 1 Distribution of probes with significant GC-related differential methylation changes in the human GC genome Most GC-related differentially methylated probes were clustered in specific chromosomal regions, especially sub-telomeric regions (Data File S2). Although the presence of SmaI/XmaI restriction sites primarily determined the distribution patterns of probes with GC-related methylation changes, certain chromosomal locations showed increased hypomethylation with little to no overlapping hypermethylation. After being normalized with respect to the probe density, chromosomes 7, 8, and 20 were clearly shown to harbor multiple long-range hypermethylated domains. In contrast, most regions in chromosomes 3, 4, 14, 15, and 18 were found to be more favorable to long-range hypomethylation (Fig. 1C).  Genome-wide analysis of GC metastasis-related differential DNA methylation  Among the 8 pairs of GC and SM samples analysed, half were metastatic GCs and the other half were sex-, age-, location-, and differentiation-matched non-metastatic control GCs (Supplementary Table S1). The MCAM analysis identified 8553 probes that were differentially methylated between the metastatic and non-metastatic GC groups (Mann-Whitney U-test, P<0.029). Among these metastasis-related candidate probes, 623 probes corresponded to 480 genes that overlapped with the GC-related genes identified above. A heatmap displaying the top 100 metastasis-related, differentially methylated probes is provided in Fig. 1D.  Identification in 15 GC-related aberrantly methylated genes  From the list of differentially methylated CGIs, 63 candidate genes were selected for further analysis based on their known functions and statistical significance of differential methylation signals between metastatic and non-metastatic GCs or between GCs and SMs (Supplementary Table S2). Ten known tumor-related genes that were not included in the oligonucleotide array were also selected as complementary and control genes for the validation study. The CGIs of these 73 genes were amplified using CpG-free primer sets. The bisulfite-PCR products were then analyzed using DHPLC to quantify the methylation levels of these CGIs in the 8 paired GC and SM samples (Fig. 2A; Data file S3). Differential methylation was observed in 37 CGIs between the 8 pairs of samples (Supplementary Table S2, underlined). The methylation levels of these 37 CGIs were further examined in additional 40 pairs of GC and SM samples, as well as 56 NorG samples. Significant differential methylation between paired GC/SM and NorG samples was observed in 15 CGIs (Ps<0.05; Table 1). The number of samples with hypermethylated CGIs in the promoter and exon-1 of BMP3, BNIP3, ECEL1, HOXD10, KCNH1, PSMD10, PTPRT, SRF, TBX5, TFPI2, and ZNF382 gradually increased from the NorG → SM → GC samples (Trend or Chi-square test, Ps<0.040). These results suggest that hypermethylation of these 11 genes may play significant roles in GC development. Furthermore, the GC samples showed a significantly higher percentage of hypermethylated CDKN2A and GFRA1 (Ps<0.050) and significantly lower levels of methylation in ELK1 and SIGIRR when compared to the SM samples.  Figure 2 Figure 2 DNA methylation of GFRA1, SRF, and ZNF382 in GC samples Table 1 Table 1 Prevalence of CGI methylation in gastric mucosa samples containing various pathological changes from GC patients and non-cancerous control patients The positive rate of methylation in CDKN2A and PSMD10 was significantly higher in the GC and SM samples than was seen in the NorG samples. In contrast, the positive-rate and proportion of methylated ELK1 and GFRA1 in the NorG samples were strikingly higher than in the GC and SM samples, indicating that hypomethylation of these genes occurs in gastric carcinogenesis as field effects. Furthermore, the positive rates of BNIP3, KCNH1, and ZNF382 methylation in the GC samples were more than 3-times higher than the SM and NorG samples (29% vs. 7~4%, 42% vs. 4~14%, and 69% vs. 18~23%, respectively). Based on this information, these genes are most likely involved in GC-specific methylation changes.  The methylation states of these CGIs were further confirmed using traditional bisulfite sequencing. The bisulfite sequencing results were consistently in agreement with the DHPLC analysis (Fig. 2B and Supplementary Fig. S3). In addition, quantitative MethyLight assays using fresh or formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue samples further validated the DHPLC results (Supplementary Fig. S4A; Spearman test, P<0.020). To understand if methylation changes in these CGIs affect gene expression, the mRNA levels of SRF, ZNF382, and GFRA1 were analyzed in matched tissue samples using quantitative RT-PCR. The qRT-PCR results showed that mRNA expression of all three genes was inversely correlated with the prevalence of methylation in their CGIs (Supplementary Fig. S4B; Spearman test, P<0.050).  Confirmation of GC metastasis-related DNA methylation markers  Among the above 48 pairs of GC and SM samples, 24 pairs were from patients with lymphatic and distant metastasis, and 24 pairs were from sex-, age-, location-, and GC differentiation grade-matched patients without metastasis. Thus, the methylation states of these 15 CGIs were further analyzed to determine if they are associated with GC metastasis. DHPLC results showed that the methylation states of the BMP3, GFRA1, SRF, and ZNF382 CGIs were significantly different between metastatic and non-metastatic GC samples. The proportion of methylated BMP3 and GFRA1 was lower in the metastatic GC samples than the non-metastatic GC samples (median, 1.8% vs. 5.9%; 8.6% vs. 38.6%; Mann-Whitney U-test, Ps<0.040). The positive rate of SRF and ZNF382 methylation was also lower in the metastatic GC samples than the non-metastatic GC samples (4% vs. 33%; 54% vs. 79%, P=0.020/0.066). Therefore, the relationship between GC metastasis and methylation of these four CGIs was tested in additional GC and SM samples obtained from Chinese patients (n=50~60). When these samples were taken together as a discovery cohort, the relationship between GC lymph/distant metastasis and the methylation changes in GFRA1, SRF, and ZNF382 was statistically significant (Table 2); however, such an association was not observed for BMP3 (data not shown).  Table 2 Table 2 SRF, ZNF382, and GFRA1 methylation prevalence comparison in SM and GC samples from Chinese patients in the discovery cohort with various clinicopathological characteristics To investigate whether the methylation status of the three potential biomarkers mentioned above had an impact on overall survival, Kaplan-Meier analysis was performed on each gene individually. Results showed that the overall survival of GC patients with GFRA1 or ZNF382 methylation-high (cut-off value: percentage of methylated copies >26.4% for GFRA1 or 1.3% for ZNF382) or SRF methylation-positive was elongated when compared to methylation-low or methylation-negative patients in the discovery cohort (log-rank test, P=0.068, Fig. 3A; P=0.010, Fig. 3B; P=0.001, Fig. 3C, respectively). Sub-stratification analysis revealed that SRF methylation was only correlated with overall survival in patients with non-cardiac GCs (P<0.033) but not with cardiac GCs (P=0.146). Therefore, only non-cardiac GC patients were included in the survival analysis in the following SRF methylation validation cohorts.  Figure 3 Figure 3 Kaplan-Meier survival curves of GC patients with different GFRA1, SRF, and ZNF382 methylation states The predictive value of these methylation markers for GC metastasis was further confirmed using three independent validation cohorts in China (n=222), Japan (n=129), and Korea (n=153). Because the proportion of both methylated and unmethylated alleles of CGIs can be quantitatively and simultaneously determined using DHPLC, this method was consistently used to detect the methylation levels within these CGIs in freshly-frozen gastric samples from Chinese and Japanese patients. However, MethyLight was used to analyze the paraffin-embedded samples from the Korean patients, as fresh samples were not available. Results from these cohorts showed that the methylation positive rates of GFRA1, SRF, and ZNF382 were inversely and significantly correlated with pTNM stage and lymph metastasis in all three cohorts (Table 3). Kaplan-Meier analysis also showed that the overall survival of GC patients with higher methylation levels of GFRA1 and SRF CGIs was consistently longer than those without methylation of these two genes across all three validation cohorts (Fig. 3A and 3B). However, correlation between ZNF382 methylation and overall survival of GC patients was not statistically significant in all three validation cohorts (Fig. 3C). These results indicate that ZNF382 methylation may be a weak GC metastasis biomarker when compared with GFRA1 and SRF methylation.  Table 3 Table 3 Comparison of SRF, ZNF382, and GFRA1 methylation positive rates in GC patients with various clinicopathological characteristics in the Chinese, Japanese and Korean validation cohorts* In addition, after adjustment for age, sex, differentiation, location, pTNM stage, and vascular embolus, GFRA1 or SRF methylation was still an adequate prognostic indicator in multivariate analysis among all patients in these validation cohorts (hazard ratios [HR]=0.543 or 0.395; 95%CI [0.304–0.938] or [0.165–0.945]; n=300 or 452).  Sub-stratification analysis showed that the overall survival of stage-I&II GC patients with methylated SRF was significantly elongated when compared to SRF methylation-negative patients in all four cohorts (HR=0.357, 95%CI [0.164–0.778], n=198). Similar difference was also observed for GFRA1 or ZNF382 methylation-high, but not statistically significant (HR=0.608 or 0.498, 95%CI [0.336–1.099] or [0.243–1.023], n=173 or 167). Among GC patients from Korea whose histological types of GCs were available, GFRA1 methylation-high was significantly associated with low-risk of metastasis of both intestinal- and diffuse-types of GCs (positive rate: 82.4% and 76.5% for non-metastatic GCs; 43.2% and 43.1% for metastatic GCs, Ps<0.05). GFRA1 methylation-high was also significantly correlated with longer overall survival of diffuse-type GC patients (HR=0.482, 95%CI [0.247–0.938], n=67). However, ZNF382 methylation-high was significantly associated with low-risk of metastasis of intestinal-type GCs (93.8% vs. 62.5%, P=0.036), but not diffuse-type GCs.  Synergic analysis of three methylation markers  In order to investigate if a combination of the methylation markers (GFRA1, SRF, and ZNF382) has a synergistic effect on predicting GC metastasis, the merged data was reanalyzed in the above 4 patient cohorts. As expected, the number of patients with one or more methylated genes among the three-gene panel was significantly decreased in GC samples with lymph/distant metastasis (Fig. 3D left; linear-trend test, P<0.00001; one gene vs. two genes, P=0.046). The sensitivity and specificity of 2~3 positive-methylation changes of 3 genes for detection of non-metastatic GCs were 60% and 67%, respectively. The positive and negative predictive values were 57% and 69%. In addition, multivariate analysis also showed that the number of combined methylation changes of GFRA1, SRF, and ZNF382 was an independent predictor of overall survival for GC patients (n=246) after adjusting for the pTNM stage, GC location, differentiation, vascular embolus, age, and sex (HR=0.734; 95%CI [0.562–0.958]) (Fig. 3D right). The pTNM stage and GC location were also independent survival factors (HR=3.608; 95%CI [2.648–4.917] and HR=2.723; 95%CI [1.608–4.613], respectively). These results suggest that using a combination of this three-gene panel may function as a synergic biomarker set for predicting GC prognosis.  GFRA1, SRF, and ZNF382 expression changes in gastric carcinogenesis  The protein expression of the three genes in the paired GC and SM samples in both regular tissue sections and tissue microarray (TMA) were analyzed using the IHC assay as described in the supplementary methods (22). IHC analysis revealed that GFRA1 expression was predominantly observed in the cytoplasm of stromal cells, especially in the vessel cells in GCs (Supplementary Fig. S5A). Among 38 pairs of IHC-informative cases, the proportion of GCs with strong GFRA1-staining was significantly higher than SMs (24/38 vs. 12/38, P<0.01). Among 28 pairs of informative cases, the proportion of GCs with strong ZNF382-staining in epithelial cells was lower than SMs (4/28 vs. 11/28, P<0.07) (Supplementary Fig. S5B). Statistically significant association was not observed between GFRA1 (or ZNF382) staining and clinical parameters, such as invasion, lymph metastasis, embolus, differentiation, and overall survival. SRF-staining was only observed in the nucleus of some stromal fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells in both regular GC and SM sections (Supplementary Fig. S5C). Therefore, SRF expression was not further examined using TMA.  Go to: Discussion Over a four-year period, a comprehensive epigenetic biomarker discovery and validation study involving over 500 patient samples from three large academic medical centers in China, Japan, and Korea had been conducted. The biomarker discovery effort started off with a genome-wide analysis of differentially methylated genes between metastatic and non-metastatic GCs in a small number of patient samples. The microarray-based methylation profiling identified a large number of GC-specific and metastasis-specific candidate genes that were differentially methylated. From the list of differentially methylated genes, a step-by-step elimination process identified a 15-gene panel associated with GC/metastasis-specific DNA methylation changes. The 15 genes were validated using multiple independent methods from a discovery cohort of GC patient samples. Finally, a methylation biomarker-set consisting of GFRA1, SRF, and ZNF382 was validated for the prediction of GC metastasis and patients’ overall survival in four cohorts from China, Japan, and Korea. This novel epigenetic biomarker set may be used in the decision making process for personalized post-operational therapy. To our knowledge, this is the first such study which specifically focuses on the metastasis of gastric cancer.  A large number of genome-wide DNA methylation studies have been reported for many different tumor types in recent years (6, 10, 11). However, most of the studies failed to perform large-scale and in-depth follow-up studies to validate the candidate genes discovered through the genome-wide analyses. As a result, few methylation markers have been developed from the large number of DNA methylation studies published so far. The present study represents the most comprehensive and quantitative characterization of DNA methylation biomarkers in GC to date. Moreover, the three methylation biomarkers associated with GC metastasis and patients’ survival were validated not only in multiple cohorts, but also in freshly frozen and paraffin-embedded samples using several independent methods such as DHPLC and MethyLight. The vigorous testing performed in this study ensures the high reliability and feasibility of these novel biomarkers in different clinical settings.  It has been previously reported that 2,540 of 17,800 tested genes are differentially expressed between 80 pairs of GC and SM samples. Furthermore, it was found that there are four times as many upregulated genes in GCs than there are downregulated genes (1983 vs. 557; GSE27342) (23). Therefore, the frequent DNA hypomethylation in the promoter and exon-1 regions of the GC methylome observed in this study may account for the prevalent increase in gene expression. In fact, an increasing number of studies have reported reactivation of proto-oncogenes by DNA hypomethylation in several cancers (24–26).  Long-range epigenetic silencing and large epigenetic structures have been reported in different cancers (27–29). Differential long-range hypermethylation and hypomethylation trends may be related to cancer/tissue-specific DNA methylation (11, 30). In the present study, it was found that chromosomes 7, 8, and 20 appeared more favorable for long-range hypermethylation (or amplification of methylated-regions). In contrast, chromosomes 3, 4, 14, 15, and 18 had an affinity for long-range hypomethylation (or deletion of methylated-regions). Further studies are warranted to determine which of these long-range hypermethylated and hypomethylated- regions are GC-specific changes and which are changes across cancer-types.  Most of the 15 aberrantly methylated genes identified in GCs are involved in cell proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, adhesion, and embryonic development (Supplementary Table S2). Previous reports have demonstrated that silencing of BMP3, BNIP3, CDKN2A, HOXD10, TFPI2, and ZNF382 via methylation correlates with both the development and progression of cancers (12, 19, 31–34). Similar associations were also observed in GC samples used in the present study. Methylation changes of KCNH1, PSMD10, and SRF in cancer tissues have not previously been reported. Furthermore, BNIP3, KCNH1, and ZNF382 methylation levels were more than 3-times higher in the GC samples than in SM and NorG samples. It is needed to study whether methylation of these genes may affect their expression states in gastric carcinogenesis. In addition, though TBX5 and ELK1 methylation is not associated with GC metastasis, the overall survival of GC patients with methylated TBX5 or ELK1 was longer than those without methylation (P=0.017 or 0.003; data not shown). Because some methylation changes may occur in both GC and SM samples from cancer patients, more GC-related methylation changes could potentially be identified if the NorG samples were used as the normal stomach reference.  Among three genes identified with GC development- and metastasis-related methylation changes, GFRA1 is a cell surface GDNF/neurturin receptor and a tyrosine kinase that is normally expressed in the nervous system and kidney. However, this gene is over-expressed in gut neural crest stem cells and in many cancers (35–41). The present study provides the first evidence that hypomethylation of GFRA1 CGIs may account for its overexpression in cancers. SRF is a master regulator of myogenesis and multiple cellular processes including cell proliferation and migration. Furthermore, SRF is known to play important roles in the epithelial-mesenchymal transition and experimental invasion through cancer and stromal cells (42–48). The present study shows, for the first time, that methylation in the exon-1 region of its CGIs may epigenetically inactivate SRF transcription. Most importantly, we found that SRF methylation was correlated with overall survival in non-cardiac GC patients, but not in cardiac GC patients. It is well known that H. pylori infection increases risk of non-cardiac GC, but not cardiac GC (49). The incidence of cardiac GC is also gradually increased in Western countries coincided with a decrease in prevalence of H. pylori infection, (50). Therefore, whether H. pylori infection contributes to SRF methylation and its biological subsequence warrants future study.  GFRA1 and SRF are two crucial genes in the GDNF-GFRA-RET-RAS-MEK-ERK-ELK-SRF pathway involved in cell migration and cancer invasion (37, 41, 46–48). Therefore, epigenetic alterations of GFRA1 and SRF may play important roles in GC metastasis through modulating this important pathway. ZNF382 is a candidate tumor suppressor gene, and its methylation is associated with GC development (34). However, its link with cancer metastasis has not previously been reported. In the present study, it was found that the methylation status of GFRA1, SRF or ZNF382 was consistently and significantly associated with GC metastasis and patients’ overall survival in multiple cohorts from different populations, suggesting that they may be used as potential biomarkers for predicting GC metastasis and prognosis. Most importantly, the combination of the three markers was not only identified as an independent survival factor, but also as a strong synergistic biomarker set helping to distinguish metastatic GCs from non-metastatic GCs. The TMA analysis of GFRA1 and ZNF382 from 40 GC patients failed to demonstrate statistically significant association of their protein expression with clinicopathological parameters and overall survival of these patients; however, up-regulation of GFRA1 protein and down-regulation of ZNF382 was indeed observed in the GCs compared to SMs, which is in agreement with hypo- and hyper-methylation of GFRA1 and ZNF382 observed in GCs. Our results suggest that DNA methylation analysis mighty be a more suitable diagnostic tool than IHC for these genes. To further prove the clinical utility of this marker panel on early prediction for GC metastasis, a prospective followup study among non-metastatic GC patients is being conducted.  In conclusion, through a comprehensive and collaborative epigenetic biomarker discovery effort, we have demonstrated that the DNA methylation changes of GFRA1, SRF, and ZNF382 were coordinately associated with GC metastasis and overall patient survival, and this three gene panel has potential to be used as a synergistic biomarker set capable of improving the prognosis and treatment for GC patients.   Statement of translational relevance  Gastric carcinoma (GC) is the second leading cause of cancer deaths in the world, with many occurring in East Asia. To identify DNA methylation biomarkers for prediction of GC metastasis, scientists and oncologists from China, USA, Japan, and Korea have carried out a five-year collaborative study to profile differential methylation patterns in metastatic and non-metastatic GCs and perform an in-depth characterization of methylation changes in the CpG islands of 73 candidate genes. From this study, we established a methylation biomarker-set composed of three genes GFRA1, SRF, and ZNF382 that could be used to synergistically predict GC metastasis and patients’ overall survival from multiple patient cohorts in China, Japan, and Korea. The established marker set will be a useful clinical tool for decision-making on personalized post-operational therapy that is currently not available.  STAT3 overactivation is a common event in many cancers, including head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), where STAT3 represents a promising therapeutic target. HNSCC is not characterized by frequent kinase mutations, in contrast to some malignancies where mutational activation of kinases upstream of STAT3 is common. Instead, STAT3 may be activated by loss-of-function (LOF) of negative regulators of STAT3, including by promoter hypermethylation of PTPRT. Here we first analyzed The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data and determined that the PTPRT promoter is frequently hypermethylated in several cancers, including HNSCC (60.1% of tumors analyzed) in association with downregulation of PTPRT mRNA expression and upregulation of pSTAT3 expression. These findings were confirmed in an independent cohort of HNSCC tumors by methylation-specific PCR (MSP) and immunohistochemistry. We demonstrate that PTPRT promoter methylation and gene silencing is reversible in HNSCC cells, leading to PTPRT-specific downregulation of pSTAT3 expression. We further show that PTPRT promoter methylation is significantly associated with sensitivity to STAT3 inhibition in HNSCC cells, suggesting that PTPRT promoter methylation may serve as a predictive biomarker for responsiveness to STAT3 inhibitors in clinical development.  Keywords: head and neck cancer, phosphatase, methylation, biomarker Go to: Introduction Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is an invasive malignancy with more than 40,000 expected diagnoses and more than 8,000 expected deaths in 2014 in the United States alone. 1 Most cancers, including HNSCC, are characterized by constitutive activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) via phosphorylation of tyrosine 705 (Y705). STAT3 is a transcription factor and potent oncoprotein that activates or maintains many cancer phenotypes including abnormal growth, proliferation, angiogenesis, and invasion as well as evasion of apoptosis and the anti-tumor immune response. 2 While aberrant activation of kinases upstream of STAT3 likely contributes to constitutive activation of STAT3 in cancer, the role of loss-of-function (LOF) of downstream regulators, especially protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs), remains incompletely understood.  The PTP superfamily is a large group of enzymes that, in close coordination with tyrosine kinases, tightly regulates diverse signaling pathways by catalyzing the removal of a phosphate group from specific signaling proteins. The largest class of PTPs in the human genome is comprised of the receptor-like PTP (PTPR) family, which contains 21 distinct members. PTPR family members span the membrane once and contain one or two intracellular catalytic domains, as well as a modular extracellular region that typically contains several protein-protein interaction domains. A role for PTPRs in the context of cancer is increasingly apparent, with many members implicated as oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes. 3 We recently reported that members of the PTPR family are frequently somatically mutated across all solid tumors analyzed, including HNSCC, with PTPR type T (PTPRT) representing the single most commonly mutated PTP in HNSCC and across all cancers. 4 Importantly, pSTAT3 is a validated direct substrate of PTPRT, and LOF mutations of PTPRT lead to increased pSTAT3 expression and enhanced HNSCC cell growth/survival. 4, 5 As these LOF PTPRT mutations are found in relatively few HNSCC tumors (5.6% of tumors analyzed), we sought to determine if loss of PTPRT expression by aberrant promoter methylation contributes to pSTAT3 overexpression and sensitivity to STAT3 inhibition in HNSCC.  Herein, we report a high frequency of aberrant PTPRT promoter hypermethylation in HNSCC and other cancers. We demonstrate that PTPRT promoter methylation significantly downregulates PTPRT expression, with an associated increase in expression of the PTPRT substrate pSTAT3 in HNSCC. We show that this methylation is reversible, leading to specific downregulation of pSTAT3 in HNSCC cells. Further, we demonstrate a correlation between PTPRT promoter methylation and sensitivity to STAT3 inhibition in HNSCC cell lines, suggesting that PTPRT methylation may serve as a predictive biomarker of responsiveness to STAT3 inhibitors currently in clinical development.  Go to: Results Frequent PTPRT promoter hypermethylation leads to decreased PTPRT mRNA expression  To assess aberrant PTPRT promoter methylation in HNSCC, we analyzed TCGA data derived from the Illumina HumanMethylation450 platform. We first determined which CG dinucleotide methylation event was most negatively correlated with PTPRT mRNA expression (Figure 1A). We then defined aberrant hypermethylation as a fractional methylation level (beta value) at least three standard deviations above the mean methylation level of the same genetic locus in organ-matched normal tissue samples and found that 60.1% (256/426 tumors analyzed) of HNSCC tumors were hypermethylated (Figure 1B). By this stringent measure, hypermethylated tumors exhibit significantly decreased PTPRT mRNA expression levels as determined by RNA-Seq (Figure 1C), suggesting the validity of the above definition and that PTPRT hypermethylation has the expected biologic effect. In contrast, copy number alterations of the PTPRT gene are relatively infrequent and are not significantly associated with altered PTPRT mRNA expression (Supplemental Figure 1). As human papilloma virus (HPV) infection is an etiologic and prognostic factor in a subset of HNSCC, we sought to determine if PTPRT promoter hypermethylation is associated with HPV status and observed no significant association (P = 1.00, Fisher’s exact test; PTPRT promoter hypermethylation in 21/36 [58.3%] HPV-positive tumors versus 145/243 [59.7%] HPV-negative tumors), suggesting that HPV infection is not a driver of PTPRT promoter methylation. 6  Figure 1 Figure 1 Frequent PTPRT promoter hypermethylation is associated with downregulation of PTPRT mRNA in HNSCC tumors In order to validate TCGA findings in an independent HNSCC human cohort, we performed methylation-specific PCR (MSP) on 45 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded oral squamous cell cancers with primers directed at the promoter region of PTPRT (representative analysis in Figure 2A). Using this semi-quantitative analysis, a similar high frequency of methylation was observed in this cohort (71.1%, 32/45 tumors analyzed; Figure 2B), further suggesting that PTPRT promoter methylation represents a common mechanism of PTPRT downregulation in HNSCC.  Figure 2 Figure 2 The PTPRT promoter is frequently methylated in an independent cohort of HNSCC tumors The PTPRT promoter is frequently hypermethylated across human cancers  Further analysis of TCGA data reveals that the PTPRT promoter is frequently hypermethylated across a broad array of cancer types when hypermethylation is defined as a fractional methylation level (beta value) at least three standard deviations above the mean methylation level of the same genetic locus in organ-matched normal tissue samples. The highest incidence of PTPRT promoter hypermethylation occurs in colon adenocarcinoma (78.7%, 289/367 tumors analyzed), while HNSCC exhibits the second highest incidence (60.1%) (Figure 3A). Of the cancers analyzed, four exhibit significant downregulation of PTPRT mRNA in hypermethylated tumors (HNSCC, colon adenocarcinoma, lung adenocarcinoma, and breast invasive carcinoma; P < 0.05), suggesting a functional role for aberrant PTPRT promoter methylation across several cancer types (Figure 3B).  Figure 3 Figure 3 The PTPRT promoter is frequently hypermethylated across cancer types in association with downregulated PTPRT mRNA PTPRT expression is inversely associated with STAT3 activation in HNSCC  Additional analysis of TCGA data indicates that PTPRT mRNA expression is inversely correlated with pSTAT3 expression as determined by reverse-phase protein array (RPPA) (Figure 4A). Since pSTAT3 is known to be a direct substrate of PTPRT, we hypothesized that PTPRT promoter methylation may contribute to increased STAT3 activation. 5 Indeed, representative immunohistochemical staining of an independent cohort of HNSCC tumors demonstrated that those with PTPRT promoter methylation, as determined by MSP, express elevated levels of pSTAT3 relative to tumors without PTPRT methylation (Figure 4B). Together, these findings suggest that PTPRT promoter methylation may be a frequent mechanism that contributes to STAT3 activation in HNSCC.  Figure 4 Figure 4 PTPRT promoter methylation and mRNA expression are associated with pSTAT3 expression PTPRT promoter methylation is reversible, leading to PTPRT-specific pSTAT3 downregulation  To further investigate the association between PTPRT promoter methylation and STAT3 activation, we selected a HNSCC cell line (Cal27) that exhibits nearly complete methylation as determined by MSP. Treatment of Cal27 cells with 5-azacytidine (5-aza), a non-specific DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) inhibitor, led to an increase in the unmethylated signal as determined by MSP (Figure 5A), concurrent with overexpression of endogenous wild-type PTPRT and downregulation of pSTAT3 expression (Figures 5B and 5C). Transfection of Cal27 cells with shRNA directed against PTPRT (shPTPRT) following 5-aza treatment also resulted in an increase in the unmethylated signal (Figure 5A), but the expression of PTPRT was significantly downregulated relative to 5-aza treatment alone. Further, pSTAT3 expression remained unaffected under these conditions (Figures 5B and 5C), suggesting that 5-aza-mediated downregulation of pSTAT3 is dependent upon demethylation and re-expression of PTPRT in these cells. These results provide mechanistic evidence that PTPRT promoter methylation contributes directly to STAT3 activation in HNSCC by downregulation of PTPRT expression.  Figure 5 Figure 5 PTPRT promoter methylation is reduced by 5-azacytidine treatment, leading to PTPRT-specific pSTAT3 downregulation in HNSCC cells PTPRT promoter methylation is associated with increased sensitivity to STAT3 inhibition in HNSCC cells  To evaluate whether PTPRT promoter methylation may serve as a predictive biomarker for STAT3 targeted therapies, we first determined EC50 values for selective STAT3 inhibitors in a panel of 8 HNSCC cell lines (Figures 6A and 6B) that exhibit varying levels of PTPRT promoter methylation as determined by MSP (summarized in Figures 6C and 6D). Figures 6E and 6F illustrate that PTPRT promoter methylation and sensitivity to Stattic (a STAT3 SH2 domain inhibitor) or JSI-124 (a JAK/STAT3 pathway inhibitor) are significantly correlated (P < 0.05), indicating that HNSCC tumors that exhibit PTPRT promoter hypermethylation may be most sensitive to treatment with STAT3 inhibitors. A similar trend was observed with the JAK2 inhibitor LY2784544, though this observation was not statistically significant (Supplemental Figure 2). Notably, we observe no direct correlation between PTPRT promoter methylation and pSTAT3 expression in this cell line panel, suggesting that high pSTAT3 expression per se may not be predictive of sensitivity to STAT3 inhibitors. Thus, inhibition of STAT3 directly rather than through upstream kinases may be more efficacious in tumors with PTPRT promoter hypermethylation.  Figure 6 Figure 6 Increased PTPRT promoter methylation is associated with increased sensitivity to STAT3 inhibition We next sought to determine whether PTPRT methylation may serve as a predictive biomarker of sensitivity to STAT3 inhibition in a heterotopic tumorgraft model of HNSCC. We inoculated 16 nude mice with 3×106 BICR 18 cells (which exhibit total PTPRT unmethylation) on one flank, and 3×106 UMSCC 1 cells (which exhibit near total PTPRT methylation) on the other flank. After 10 days, the unmethylated cells had not formed any tumors, while the methylated cells had formed palpable masses in 15/16 mice (mean volume = 100.3 mm3). As BICR 18 cells are the only HNSCC cells identified to date with total (or near total) PTPRT unmethylation, we are therefore unable to determine the relative sensitivities of unmethylated versus methylated HNSCC cells in vivo. Nevertheless, starting on day 10 post-inoculation, 8 mice were randomized to receive 50 mg/kg Stattic by oral gavage five times per week, with serial tumor measurements performed three times per week. After 9 days of treatment, a large and statistically significant (P < 0.01) reduction in tumor volume was observed in the Stattic treatment arm relative to the no treatment group (Supplemental Figure 3), confirming that a PTPRT-methylated HNSCC heterotopic tumorgraft is indeed sensitive to STAT3 inhibition in vivo.  Go to: Discussion The survival rate for HNSCC patients has remained stagnant in recent decades despite advances in the understanding of the biological underpinnings of this disease and improved therapeutic strategies. In 2006, the Food and Drug Administration approved cetuximab, a monoclonal antibody targeting the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), for the treatment of HNSCC patients. 7 Unfortunately, cetuximab has produced limited success in the clinic, at least in part due to the lack of predictive biomarkers, including EGFR expression or copy number gain. 8 There is therefore a need for the identification of both novel targets for pharmacologic inhibition and biomarkers for sensitivity to emerging therapeutics. STAT3 is a promising target for pharmacologic inhibition, and STAT3 inhibitors are being tested in early phase clinical trials. 2 We previously reported that STAT3 activation contributed to cetuximab resistance in HNSCC preclinical models and tumors from patients treated on cetuximab-containing protocols. 9 It is increasingly apparent that most molecular targeted agents will be most effective in subgroups of patients identified by specific genomic/transcriptomic/proteomic characteristics. The identification of biomarkers that identify those individuals most likely to benefit from these agents would allow the design of more scientifically rational clinical trials.  Here we report that the PTPRT promoter is frequently hypermethylated in HNSCC and other cancers in association with decreased PTPRT expression. A high rate of PTPRT promoter hypermethylation has also been reported in sporadic colorectal cancer, where nearly all tumors analyzed were methylated in contrast to no observed methylation in matched normal tissues, as well as in hepatocellular carcinoma, where the PTPRT methylation levels progressively increase from adjacent tissue to tumor. 10, 11 Our present findings indicate that PTPRT promoter methylation may represent a common event across many cancer types, suggesting that the development of a therapeutic strategy informed by this event may be of wide clinical benefit.  To date, the functional signaling consequences downstream of PTPRT promoter methylation have not been described, and as such, no strategies to mitigate the effects of this event have been proposed. Here we demonstrate that PTPRT promoter methylation is associated with a decrease in PTPRT mRNA expression, which in turn is associated with an increase in expression of the PTPRT substrate pSTAT3. We further evaluated PTPRT promoter methylation in an independent cohort of HNSCC and observed a similar frequency to that observed by TCGA, thus confirming the high incidence of this event. We also confirm that PTPRT methylation significantly contributes to pSTAT3 upregulation in HNSCC cells. Together, these studies suggest that HNSCC cells and tumors that exhibit high levels of PTPRT promoter methylation may be more dependent on STAT3 signaling for growth and survival, thus offering the opportunity to exploit PTPRT methylation as a predictive biomarker of sensitivity to STAT3 inhibition. Importantly, we have established an association between PTPRT promoter methylation and sensitivity to inhibitors of the STAT3 signaling pathway. These studies therefore suggest that screening for PTPRT promoter methylation may ultimately allow the identification of patients who are most likely to benefit from treatment with STAT3 targeting agents and provide a rationale for designing future clinical trials that select for patients with a high degree of PTPRT promoter methylation.   The activity of phosphatases could be influenced by genetic, as well as epigenetic alterations. In our study, we have investigated the methylation status of four PTPRs: PTPRM, PTPRT, PTPRR and PTPRZ1, which were pre-selected using microarray techniques as being alternatively methylated in sporadic colorectal cancer (CRC). The analyses were carried out on 131 surgical specimens obtained from sporadic CRC patients. The methylation status of the four genes was examined using methyl specific PCR (MSP). The analysis of promoter methylation using an Illumina 27K microarray revealed four protein tyrosine phosphatases PTPRM, PTPRT, PTPRR and PTPRZ1 as being hypermethylated with β-value ≥0.2 and P≤0.05. Subsequent analysis using MSP confirmed these observations-the frequency of promoter methylation was significantly higher in tumor cells compared with matched normal tissue for each of the analyzed genes. There was no association observed between the methylation status of PTPRs and either CIMP, K-ras (codon 12) and BRAF (exon 15, V600E) mutations or tumor localization (proximal/distal). The results of our study show a statistically significant difference between promoter methylation in cancerous and healthy tissue. This result supports the hypothesis that the PTPR family has an important role in the etiology of CRC. MEDLINE The activity of phosphatases could be influenced by genetic, as well as epigenetic alterations. In our study, we have investigated the methylation status of four PTPRs: PTPRM, PTPRT, PTPRR and PTPRZ1, which were pre-selected using microarray techniques as being alternatively methylated in sporadic colorectal cancer (CRC). The analyses were carried out on 131 surgical specimens obtained from sporadic CRC patients. The methylation status of the four genes was examined using methyl specific PCR (MSP). The analysis of promoter methylation using an Illumina 27K microarray revealed four protein tyrosine phosphatases PTPRM, PTPRT, PTPRR and PTPRZ1 as being hypermethylated with beta-value >= 0.2 and P <= 0.05. Subsequent analysis using MSP confirmed these observations-the frequency of promoter methylation was significantly higher in tumor cells compared with matched normal tissue for each of the analyzed genes. There was no association observed between the methylation status of PTPRs and either CIMP, K-ras (codon 12) and BRAF (exon 15, V600E) mutations or tumor localization (proximal/ distal). The results of our study show a statistically significant difference between promoter methylation in cancerous and healthy tissue. This result supports the hypothesis that the PTPR family has an important role in the etiology of CRC
49||Tyrosine phosphorylation, regulated by protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) and kinases (PTKs), is important in signaling pathways underlying tumorigenesis. A mutational analysis of the tyrosine phosphatase gene superfamily in human cancers identified 83 somatic mutations in six PTPs (PTPRF, PTPRG, PTPRT, PTPN3, PTPN13, PTPN14), affecting 26% of colorectal cancers and a smaller fraction of lung, breast, and gastric cancers. Fifteen mutations were nonsense, frameshift, or splice-site alterations predicted to result in truncated proteins lacking phosphatase activity. Five missense mutations in the most commonly altered PTP (PTPRT) were biochemically examined and found to reduce phosphatase activity. Expression of wild-type but not a mutant PTPRT in human cancer cells inhibited cell growth. These observations suggest that the mutated tyrosine phosphatases are tumor suppressor genes, regulating cellular pathways that may be amenable to therapeutic intervention. Phosphorylation of tyrosine residues is a central feature of many cellular signaling pathways, including those affecting growth, differentiation, cell cycle regulation, apoptosis, and invasion (1, 2). This phosphorylation is coordinately controlled by protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) and phosphatases (PTPs). Although a variety of PTK genes have been directly linked to tumorigenesis through somatic activating mutations (3–6), only a few PTP genes have been implicated in cancer (7–10). Moreover, it is not known how many or how frequently members of the PTP gene family are altered in any particular cancer type. We have systematically addressed these issues by comprehensive mutational analysis of the PTP gene superfamily in colorectal tumors.  The PTP gene superfamily is composed of three main families: (i) the classical PTPs, including the receptor PTPs (RPTPs) and the nonreceptor PTPs (NRPTPs); (ii) the dual specificity phosphatases (DSPs), which can dephosphorylate serine and threonine in addition to tyrosine residues; and (iii) the low molecular weight phosphatases (LMPs) (1). Using an approach similar to that described in a recent bioinformatic analysis of PTPs in the mouse genome (11), we employed a combination of Hidden Markov Models representing catalytic domains of members of the PTP superfamily to identify 53 classical PTPs (21 RPTPs and 32 NRPTPs), 33 DSPs, and one LMP in the human genome (12). This analysis revealed a set of genes representing all known human PTPs (13) as well as seven putative PTPs.  As an initial screen to evaluate whether these phosphatases are genetically altered in human cancer, we analyzed the coding exons of all 87 members of this gene superfamily in 18 colorectal cancers. A total of 1375 exons from all annotated RPTPs, NRPTPs, DSPs, and LMPs were extracted from genomic databases (12). These exons were amplified by polymerase chain reaction from cancer genomic DNA samples and directly sequenced with dye terminator chemistry (12). Whenever a presumptive mutation was identified, we attempted to determine whether it was somatically acquired (i.e., tumor specific) by examining the sequence of the gene in genomic DNA from normal tissue of the relevant patient.  From the 3.3 Mb of sequence information obtained, we identified six genes containing somatic mutations, including three members of the RPTP subfamily (PTPRF, PTPRG, and PTPRT) and three members of the NRPTP subfamily (PTPN3, PTPN13, and PTPN14). These six genes were then further analyzed for mutations in another 157 colorectal cancers. Through this strategy, we identified 77 mutations in the six genes, in aggregate affecting 26% of the colorectal tumors analyzed (table S1 and Fig. 1). Examination of these six genes in seven other tumor types identified PTPRT mutations in two of 11 (18%) lung cancers and two of 12 gastric cancers (17%), and PTPRF mutations in one of 11 (9%) lung cancers and one of 11 (9%) breast cancers. No mutations were identified in 12 pancreatic cancers, 12 ovarian cancers, 12 medulloblastomas, or 12 glioblastomas (table S1 and Fig. 1). In total, 83 nonsynonymous mutations were observed, all of which were somatic in the cancers that could be assessed (12).    Download high-res image  Open in new tab  Download Powerpoint Fig. 1. Distribution of mutations in PTPRT, PTPN13, PTPN14, PTPRG, PTPRF, and PTPN3. Black arrows indicate location of missense mutations, red arrows indicate location of nonsense mutations or frameshifts, and boxes represent functional domains (B41, band 41; CA, carbonic anhydrase; FN3, fibronectin type III; IG, immunoglobulin; MAM, meprin/A5/PTPμ; PDZ, postsynaptic density, discs large, zonula occludans; PTPc, catalytic phosphatase domain). Black stars indicate PTPRT mutants evaluated for phosphatase activity (Fig. 2), and the red star indicates PTPRT mutant evaluated for effects on cell proliferation (Fig. 3).  Fifteen of the 83 mutations were nonsense, frameshift, or splice-site alterations, all of which were predicted to result in aberrant or truncated proteins. In 16 tumors both alleles of the phosphatase gene appeared to be mutated, a characteristic often associated with tumor suppressor genes. The majority of tumors with PTP gene mutations also contained mutations in KRAS or BRAF, and nine tumors contained alterations in previously reported tyrosine kinase genes (table S1). Thus, the mutant phosphatases identified in this study are likely to operate through cellular pathways distinct from those associated with previously identified mutant kinases.  Analysis of mutations in tumors is complicated by the fact that mutations can arise either as functional alterations affecting key genes underlying the neoplastic process or as nonfunctional “passenger” changes. The multiple waves of clonal expansion and selection that occur throughout tumorigenesis lead to fixation of any mutation that had previously occurred in any predecessor cell, regardless of whether the mutation was actually responsible for the clonal expansion. Two independent lines of evidence suggest that the sequence alterations we observed are functional. First, the ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous mutations provides an indication of selection, as synonymous alterations usually do not exert a growth advantage. There were no somatic synonymous mutations detected in the colorectal cancers analyzed, resulting in a ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous mutations of 77 to 0, much higher than the expected 2:1 ratio for nonselected passenger mutations (P < 1 × 10–6). Second, the prevalence of mutations in the coding regions of the analyzed genes was ∼19 per Mb of tumor DNA, similar to the prevalence of functional somatic alterations observed in other gene families [e.g., the tyrosine kinome (6)] and significantly higher than the prevalence of nonfunctional alterations previously observed in the cancer genomes (∼1 per Mb, P < 0.01) (14). These data support the idea that these mutations were the targets of selection during tumorigenesis.  The great majority of the nonsense and frameshift mutations (Fig. 1) would result in polypeptides devoid of C-terminal phosphatase catalytic domains, thereby leading to inactivation of the phosphatase. To evaluate whether tumor-specific point mutations alter phosphatase activity, we biochemically tested mutant versions of PTPRT, the most frequently mutated PTP in the superfamily. Mutations in both intracellular PTP domains (D1 and D2) were evaluated. His-tagged versions of the catalytic region of wild-type PTPRT, two D1 mutants (Q987K and N1128I), and three D2 mutants (R1212W, R1346L, and T1368M) were produced in bacteria and analyzed for phosphatase activity by using 6,8-difluoro-4-methylumbelliferyl phosphate (DiFMUP) as a substrate (Fig. 2) (12). All D1 and D2 mutants had reduced phosphatase activity compared with the wild-type protein (Fig. 2). The kinetic parameter Kcat was reduced in both D1 mutants, while Km was increased in all three D2 mutants, suggesting that mutations in the two domains may have different effects on enzymatic activity. Although it has been thought that the D2 domain is usually catalytically inactive (1), our results are consistent with recent studies that show that the D2 domain is important for phosphatase activity in some receptor phosphatases (15).    Download high-res image  Open in new tab  Download Powerpoint Fig. 2. Evaluation of phosphatase activity of mutant PTPRT. (A) Saturation kinetics of wild-type and mutant PTPRT. His-tagged versions of PTPRT protein segments comprising the two catalytic domains containing wild-type (WT) and tumor-specific mutant sequences were expressed in bacteria and purified using nickelaffinity chromatography. Equal amounts of WT and mutant proteins were used to evaluate enzyme kinetics. The rate of hydrolysis of substrate (DiFMUP) is plotted against increasing substrate concentration. Data were fitted to the Michaelis-Menton equation, and the resulting kinetic parameters of WT and mutant proteins are indicated in (B).  These biochemical data on missense mutations, coupled with the large number of truncating mutations, suggested that PTPRT functions as a tumor suppressor gene. To determine whether PTPRT expression can inhibit tumor cell growth, we transfected wild-type PTPRT into HCT116 colorectal cancer cells (12). An identical expression vector containing an R632X mutant of PTPRT was used for comparison. Wild-type PTPRT potently inhibited cell growth in this assay, as seen by the substantial decrease in the number of neomycin-resistant colonies compared with the R632X mutant or with vector alone (Fig. 3, A and B). Similar results with wild-type and mutant PTPRT were also observed in DLD1 colorectal cancer cells.    Download high-res image  Open in new tab  Download Powerpoint Fig. 3. PTPRT overexpression suppresses growth of human cancer cells. (A) HCT116 colorectal cancer cells were transfected with wild-type (WT) PTPRT construct, truncated R632X mutant PTPRT construct, or empty pCI-Neo vector. The photographs show colonies stained with crystal violet after 14 days of geneticin selection. (B) Number of resistant colonies (mean of two 25 cm2 flasks) for WT PTPRT, mutant PTPRT, and empty vector.  The combination of these genetic, biochemical, and cellular data suggest that PTPRT and the other identified phosphatases are likely to act as tumor suppressors. This is consistent with the function of other phosphatases implicated in tumorigenesis (7, 8, 16) and with the general role of phosphatases in inhibiting various growth-promoting signaling pathways (2). The absence of biallelic mutations in a subset of the analyzed tumors suggests that some alterations may act in a dominant-negative fashion or may affect gene dosage, mechanisms that have been previously involved in inactivation of other tumor suppressor genes (17, 18).  Little is known about the functional role of the tyrosine phosphatases discussed here. PTPN13 appears to be involved in apoptosis (19) and may be partly responsible for the antitumor effects of tamoxifen (20). Overexpression of PTPN3 inhibits growth of NIH/3T3 cells, possibly through interaction with valosin-containing protein (VCP/p97) (21). PTPN14 and PTPRF are thought to play a role in cell adhesion by regulating tyrosine phosphorylation of adherens junction proteins (22, 23). Because increased phosphorylation of adherens junctions has been shown to increase cell motility and migration (22, 24), mutational inactivation of these genes may be an important step in cancer cell invasion and metastasis. PTPRG maps to chromosome 3p14.2, a region frequently lost in lung, renal, and early-stage breast tumors, and is thought to be a target of the translocation at 3p14 in familial renal cell carcinoma (25–27). However, no point mutations in PTPRG (28) or any of the other genes identified here have been previously described in any cancer. PTPRT is expressed in the developing central nervous system and in the adult cerebellum (29) and had not been thought to play a role in the growth or differentiation of other tissues. We have found that PTPRT is expressed in a variety of human tissues, including normal colon epithelium as well as cells derived from colorectal cancers (fig. S1).  Phosphatases affect signaling pathways that may be amenable to therapeutic intervention in cancer cells (2). Although reactivation of incapacitated phosphatases is likely to be pharmacologically challenging, identification of the corresponding kinases that phosphorylate substrates normally regulated by the mutant phosphatases could provide novel therapeutic targets. Like the analysis of genetic alterations in tyrosine kinases (6), the present study suggests the possibility of individualized therapy based on the mutant phosphatases present in specific tumors. Conceivably, this approach would have broad therapeutic use, because more than 50% of colorectal tumors analyzed to date have alterations in at least one member of the tyrosine phosphatome or kinome.
50||Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase T (PTPRT/PTPρ) is frequently mutated in human cancers including colon, lung, gastric and skin cancers. More than half of the identified tumor-derived mutations are located in the extracellular part of PTPρ. However, the functional significance of those extracellular domain mutations remains to be defined. Here we report that the extracellular domain of PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation. This homophilic interaction is very specific, as PTPρ does not interact with its closest homolog PTPμ in a cell aggregation assay. We further demonstrated that all 5 tumor-derived mutations located in the N-terminal MAM and Ig domains impair, to varying extents, their ability to from cell aggregates, indicating that those mutations are loss-of-function mutations. Our results suggest that PTPρ may play an important role in cell-cell adhesion and mutational inactivation of this phosphatase could promote tumor migration and metastasis.  Go to: Introduction Tyrosine phosphorylation is coordinately controlled by protein tyrosine kinases and phosphatases and is a central feature of many signaling pathways involved in tumor development (1). While activating mutations in protein tyrosine kinases have been shown to play vital roles in tumorigenesis (1), the role of phosphatases is less well-defined. We recently identified PTPRT, also known as PTPρ, as the most frequently mutated PTP gene in colorectal cancers (CRCs) (2). PTPRT was also mutationally altered in lung, gastric cancers and melanomas (2). The spectrum of mutations, which included nonsense mutations and frameshifts, suggested that these mutations were inactivating (2). Biochemical analyses demonstrated that missense mutations in the catalytic domains of PTPρ diminished its phosphatase activity and overexpression of PTPρ inhibited CRC cell growth (2). Taken together, these studies strongly supported the notion that PTPρ normally acts as a tumor suppressor gene. This conclusion was also supported by a transposon-based somatic mutagenesis screen in mice, wherein PTPρ was isolated as a target gene from two different mouse transgenic sarcomas (3).  PTPRT (PTPρ) is a member of the type IIB receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase (RPTP) subfamily (4). Other members of this subfamily include PTPRM (PTPμ), PTPRK (PTPκ) and PCP2 (also called PTPλ, PTPψ, PTPRO-omicron, PTPπ, hPTP-J) (5). These 4 RPTPs share the same domain structure: an extracelluar domain, a juxtamembrane region and two phosphatase domains (6). The extracellular domains of type IIB RPTPs have high sequence identities (7, 8), all consist of a MAM (memprin/A5/PTPμ) domain, an Ig domain, and four fibronectin type III (FNIII) repeats (6). The MAM domain is suggested to play a role in protein dimerization (6). The Ig domain is a disulfide structure that is found in many cell surface proteins and has been shown to mediate homophilic and heterophilic interactions between cell adhesion molecules (6). The FNIII motif was originally identified in the extracellular matrix protein fibronectin and later found to be present in many immunoglobulin superfamily cell adhesion molecules (6). We have identified ~15 somatic mutations that are localized in the extracellular domain of PTPRT/PTPρ. How these mutations affect the functions of PTPρ remains to be determined.  Three close homologs of PTPρ, PTPμ, PTPκ and PTPλ (PCP-2), are known to mediate homophilic cell-cell adhesion (9– 12). Expression of the full-length PTPμ (9) (10) or a construct encoding the extracellular, transmembrane and 55 amino acids of the juxtamembrane domain of PTPμ in non-adhesive Sf9 insect cells induces cell aggregation (9). Furthermore, homophilic binding of PTPμ was demonstrated between PTPμ-coated fluorescent beads and cells that endogenously express PTPμ (9). The minimal region required for homophilic binding was mapped to the Ig domain of PTPμ (13). In addition, the Ig domain is required for proper cell surface localization (14). However, assays that test cell-cell aggregation demonstrate that the MAM and Ig domains as well as the first two fibronectin type III repeats are required for efficient cell-cell aggregation (15– 18). Similarly, PTPκ was also demonstrated to mediate homophilic cell-cell aggregation (11). Here we report that PTPRT (PTPρ), like its homologs, mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation in Sf9 cells. Most importantly, the tumor-derived mutations located in the MAM and Ig domains are defective in this cell-cell adhesion function.  Go to: Results The extracellular domain of PTPρ mediates cell-cell aggregation in Sf9 cells  To test whether PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell adhesion, we made the following PTPρ baculoviral constructs expressing: (1) full-length PTPρ; (2) the intracellular fragment of PTPρ (Intra); (3) the extracellular fragment of PTPρ with its transmembrane domain (Extra-TM); (4) the extracellular fragment of PTPρ with its transmembrane, juxtamembrane and wedge domains (Extra-JMD-W); (5) a chimera containing the extracellular and transmembrane domains of the EGF receptor and the intracellular PTP domains of PTPρ (Fig. 1A). All of those fragments were tagged with V5 epitope tags. Proteins of the expected size were expressed in Sf9 cells infected with those baculoviral constructs (Fig. 1B). All of these proteins, but the intracellular PTPρ, were expressed on the surface on Sf9 cells (Fig. 1C). To test whether these PTPρ recombinant proteins mediate cell-cell adhesion, a cell aggregation assay was performed following the procedure of Brady-Kalnay et al (9). Sf9 cells infected with a baculovirus encoding PTPμ, which was previously demonstrated to mediate cell-cell aggregation, were treated in parallel as a positive control (Fig. 2). As shown in Fig 2, the non-adhesive Sf9 cells expressing either the full-length PTPρ or PTPρ-JMD-W formed cell aggregates. On the contrary, Sf9 cells expressing either the intracellular fragments of PTPρ or the EGFR/PTPρ chimeras remained as a suspension of single cells (Fig 1C). These results indicate that the extracullar fragment of PTPρ play an important role in mediating cell-cell aggregation and the phosphatase activity of PTPρ is not required for this function. Surprisingly, although the construct that encodes the PTPρ extracellular fragment with the transmembrane domain sequences only (Extra-TM) was expressed on the cell surface (see Figure 7), this protein failed to mediate cell aggregation of Sf9 cells, suggesting that additional juxtamembrane sequences are required for either forming or stablizing the cell aggregates.  Figure 1 Figure 1 Expression of PTPρ constructs in Sf9 cells Figure 2 Figure 2 PTPρ mediates cell-cell aggregation Figure 7 Figure 7 Cell Surface Protein expression of PTPμ and the PTPρ mutant proteins PTPρ mediates highly specific homophilic cell-cell aggregation  To test whether PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation, one set of Sf9 cells were infected with virus expressing enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) and another set of Sf9 cells were co-infected with viruses expressing either the full-length PTPρ or red fluorescent protein (RFP). The GFP expressing cells were mixed with equal number cells expressing full-length PTPρ (co-expressing RFP) and the aggregation assays were performed. As shown in Fig 3A, the GFP labeled cells did not aggregate and did not contribute to the aggregates formed by cells expressing full-length PTPρ (RFP). These results strongly suggest that the aggregation of Sf9 cells expressing PTPρ is mediated through a homophilic interaction among PTPρ molecules in trans, but not through a heterophilic interaction between molecules expressed on the surface of Sf9 cells. Interestingly, the homophilic interaction of PTPρ is very specific. Although 63% of the amino acid sequences of the extracellular domain of PTPρ are identical with that of PTPRM (PTPμ), Sf9 cells expressing PTPρ (co-expressing RFP) did not aggregate with PTPμ expressing cells (co-expressing GFP) as shown in Fig. 3B.  Figure 3 Figure 3 PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation The tumor-derived PTPRT/PTPρ mutations in the MAM and Ig domains are defective in cell-cell aggregation  Several studies demonstrated that the MAM and Ig domains as well as the first two FNIII repeats of PTPμ are the minimal essential regions required for its homophilic interaction (13, 15, 17, 18). We identified 5 tumor-specific mutations that are located in the two domains (2). Among these five mutations, the F74S mutation is located in the MAM domain and the other four mutations (A209T, K218T, F248S and Y280H) are located in the Ig domain (Fig. 4A). To test whether these mutations affect their ability to mediate cell-cell aggregation in Sf9 cells, we engineered the five mutations by site-directed mutagenesis using the full-length PTPρ baculoviral construct as the template. The five mutant proteins are expressed at the expected size and at similar levels to wild-type PTPρ on a western blot (Fig. 4B), indicating that these mutations do not affect their protein stability. None of these mutations significantly alter their cell surface expression, as all five mutant PTPρ proteins showed strong plasma membrane staining (Fig. 4C and Fig. 7). However, as shown in Fig. 5, all mutant PTPρ proteins formed smaller aggregates than that of the wild-type PTPρ protein. To quantify the cells aggregates, percentage of cells that are incorporate into > 5-cell clusters were counted (as described in the material and methods section). As shown in Fig. 5, Sf9 cells expressing all the mutants formed significantly less aggregates than that of cells expressing wild-type PTPρ. The deletion construct of PTPρ lacking the two phosphatase domains (PTPρ Extra-JMD-W) and the K218T mutant exhibited similar levels of aggregation that were statistically less than wild-type PTPρ (p < 0.01). Taken together, our data demonstrated that the five tumor-derived mutations located the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ are deficient in cell-cell adhesion. Therefore, these mutations exhibit varying degrees of loss-of-function in cell adhesion.  Figure 4 Figure 4 Expression of tumor-derived PTPρ mutants in Sf9 cells Figure 5 Figure 5 Tumor-derived mutations of PTPρ are defective in cell-cell aggregation Mechanistically, the defect of the PTPρ mutations in cell-cell adhesion could be resulted from either impaired ability in homophilic binding or reduced cell surface expression. Although immunofluorescent staining indicated that those mutations do not alter cell surface expression qualitatively, it is imperative to quantify cell surface expression of mutant PTPρ proteins. As described in detail in the method section, baculovirus-infected Sf9 cell surface proteins were labeled with Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin and isolated on immobilized NeutrAvidin Gel. Western blots were performed with antibodies to PTPμ (SK18) or the V5 tag. The SK18 antibody recognizes the cytoplasmic domain of both PTPμ and PTPρ. The results shown in Fig. 7 demonstrate that full length PTPμ and the wild-type, mutant and deleted PTPρ proteins were expressed at the cell surface. As a control for a non-cell surface protein, the cytoplasmic intracellular domain of PTPμ (PTPμ-intra) was expressed that is detected by SK18 (9). PTPμ intra does not contain an extracellular domain and therefore is not biotinylated nor precipitated by the NeutrAvidin gel (Fig. 7). Quantitatively, the levels of cell surface expression of the 5 tumor-derived PTPρ mutations were similar to that of wild-type protein. If the cell surface expression level (CSE value) of wild-type PTPρ is arbitrarily assigned as 1, the CSE values of F74S, A209T, K218T, F248S and Y280H mutations were 2.3, 1.1, 1.6, 0.6 and 0.8 respectively. Interestingly, some PTPρ mutants that contain the extracellular domain but are unable to mediate cell-cell aggregation are expressed at higher levels on the Sf9 cell surface than wild-type PTPρ. These results suggest that defect of PTPρ mutation in cell-cell adhesion is mainly due to reduced homophilic binding affinity of the mutant proteins. Interestingly, the cell surface expression levels PTPρ Extra-TM (CSE value = 27) and PTPρ Extra-JMD-W (CSE value = 20) were much higher than that of full-length protein for unknown reasons.  Go to: Discussion We demonstrated that PTPRT/PTPρ meditates homophilic cell-cell aggregation and five tumor-derived mutations located in the MAM and Ig domains impair this function. Our results strongly suggest that those PTPρ loss-of-function mutations are selected for during the process of tumor development; therefore, these mutations should play a causal role in tumorigenesis. We chose to examine whether the MAM and Ig domain mutations are deficient in cell aggregation, because previous studies indicated that these two domains of PTPμ, a close homolog of PTPρ, are required for its cell-cell aggregation function (13, 15, 17). Recently, the crystal structure of the N-terminal MAM and Ig domains of PTPμ was determined at 2.7 Å resolution (17, 18). Five tumor-derived mutations of PTPρ are located in the two domains and all of them can be mapped to equivalent residues in the MAM and Ig domain structure of PTPμ. Based on the crystal structure, the authors predicted that 4 of them (F74S, A209T, F248S and Y280H) would cause significant perturbation of the structure of PTPRT, because these mutations dramatically alter the character of buried side-chains (17). Moreover, the fifth mutation K218T is located on the surface of the Ig domain and the authors predicted that this mutation would directly alter protein-protein interactions (17). Our data indicated that the K218T mutation affects the size of aggregates and only a small effect on the percentage of cells incorporated into the aggregates, suggesting that the K218T mutant may decrease the binding affinity of PTPρ. Interestingly, the other four mutations significantly reduce the percentage of aggregation, therefore, these data suggest that the F74S, A209T, F248S and Y280H mutations dramatically alter the domain structure and lead to perturbation of the homophilic interaction of PTPρ. Our previous studies showed that the tumor-derived phosphatase domain mutations of PTPρ diminish its phosphatase activity and overexpression of PTPρ suppresses the growth of colorectal cancer cells, indicating that PTPρ normally act as a tumor suppressor (2). The loss-of-function nature of these five extracellular mutations provides further supportive evidence to this notion.  The finding that PTPρ mediates homophilic cell aggregation of non-adhesive insect Sf9 cells suggests that this protein could be involved in cell-cell adhesion in human epithelial cells where it is endogenously expressed. The type IIB RPTP subfamily consists of PTPμ, PTPκ, PTPρ and PCP-2. It has been shown that PTPμ, PTPκ and PTPλ (PCP-2), mediate homophilic cell-cell adhesion (9–12). Interestingly, the homophilic interaction of these RPTPs seems to be highly specific, because we and others showed that neither PTPρ nor PTPκ (15) interact with PTPμ. It is worth noting that the juxtamembrane domain of PTPρ may be necessary for its cell adhesion function. As shown in Figure 2, Sf9 cells expressing the extracellular and juxtamembrane domains of PTPρ, but not cells expressing the extracellular and transmembrane portion of the protein (PTPρ Extra-TM), formed cell aggregates, although both proteins were expressed on the cell surface (Fig. 7). Expression of a construct encoding the extracellular, transmembrane and only 55 amino acids of the juxtamembrane domain of PTPμ in non-adhesive Sf9 insect cells induced cell aggregation (9). It is possible that cis interactions between the membrane proximal juxtamembrane domains are required for initiating, stabilizing or maintaining cell-cell adhesion. Interestingly, there are two PTPRT mutations (K788E and R790I) located in the juxtamembrane domain that are found in lung cancers (1). Moreover, Besco et al. showed that PTPρ interacts with cell adhesion molecules including E-cadherin, α, β, and γ-catenin, and α;-actinin (19). PTPμ also binds the cadherin-catenin complex (7, 20–22). Loss of cell-cell adhesion, such as genetic and epigenetic inactivation of cell adhesion molecule E-cadherin, is thought to be a prerequisite for carcinoma invasion and metastasis (23). Therefore, mutational inactivation of the cell adhesion function PTPρ may also play a critical role in tumor migration and metastasis.
51||Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase T (PTPRT/PTPρ) is frequently mutated in human cancers including colon, lung, gastric and skin cancers. More than half of the identified tumor-derived mutations are located in the extracellular part of PTPρ. However, the functional significance of those extracellular domain mutations remains to be defined. Here we report that the extracellular domain of PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation. This homophilic interaction is very specific, as PTPρ does not interact with its closest homolog PTPμ in a cell aggregation assay. We further demonstrated that all 5 tumor-derived mutations located in the N-terminal MAM and Ig domains impair, to varying extents, their ability to from cell aggregates, indicating that those mutations are loss-of-function mutations. Our results suggest that PTPρ may play an important role in cell-cell adhesion and mutational inactivation of this phosphatase could promote tumor migration and metastasis.  Go to: Introduction Tyrosine phosphorylation is coordinately controlled by protein tyrosine kinases and phosphatases and is a central feature of many signaling pathways involved in tumor development (1). While activating mutations in protein tyrosine kinases have been shown to play vital roles in tumorigenesis (1), the role of phosphatases is less well-defined. We recently identified PTPRT, also known as PTPρ, as the most frequently mutated PTP gene in colorectal cancers (CRCs) (2). PTPRT was also mutationally altered in lung, gastric cancers and melanomas (2). The spectrum of mutations, which included nonsense mutations and frameshifts, suggested that these mutations were inactivating (2). Biochemical analyses demonstrated that missense mutations in the catalytic domains of PTPρ diminished its phosphatase activity and overexpression of PTPρ inhibited CRC cell growth (2). Taken together, these studies strongly supported the notion that PTPρ normally acts as a tumor suppressor gene. This conclusion was also supported by a transposon-based somatic mutagenesis screen in mice, wherein PTPρ was isolated as a target gene from two different mouse transgenic sarcomas (3).  PTPRT (PTPρ) is a member of the type IIB receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase (RPTP) subfamily (4). Other members of this subfamily include PTPRM (PTPμ), PTPRK (PTPκ) and PCP2 (also called PTPλ, PTPψ, PTPRO-omicron, PTPπ, hPTP-J) (5). These 4 RPTPs share the same domain structure: an extracelluar domain, a juxtamembrane region and two phosphatase domains (6). The extracellular domains of type IIB RPTPs have high sequence identities (7, 8), all consist of a MAM (memprin/A5/PTPμ) domain, an Ig domain, and four fibronectin type III (FNIII) repeats (6). The MAM domain is suggested to play a role in protein dimerization (6). The Ig domain is a disulfide structure that is found in many cell surface proteins and has been shown to mediate homophilic and heterophilic interactions between cell adhesion molecules (6). The FNIII motif was originally identified in the extracellular matrix protein fibronectin and later found to be present in many immunoglobulin superfamily cell adhesion molecules (6). We have identified ~15 somatic mutations that are localized in the extracellular domain of PTPRT/PTPρ. How these mutations affect the functions of PTPρ remains to be determined.  Three close homologs of PTPρ, PTPμ, PTPκ and PTPλ (PCP-2), are known to mediate homophilic cell-cell adhesion (9– 12). Expression of the full-length PTPμ (9) (10) or a construct encoding the extracellular, transmembrane and 55 amino acids of the juxtamembrane domain of PTPμ in non-adhesive Sf9 insect cells induces cell aggregation (9). Furthermore, homophilic binding of PTPμ was demonstrated between PTPμ-coated fluorescent beads and cells that endogenously express PTPμ (9). The minimal region required for homophilic binding was mapped to the Ig domain of PTPμ (13). In addition, the Ig domain is required for proper cell surface localization (14). However, assays that test cell-cell aggregation demonstrate that the MAM and Ig domains as well as the first two fibronectin type III repeats are required for efficient cell-cell aggregation (15– 18). Similarly, PTPκ was also demonstrated to mediate homophilic cell-cell aggregation (11). Here we report that PTPRT (PTPρ), like its homologs, mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation in Sf9 cells. Most importantly, the tumor-derived mutations located in the MAM and Ig domains are defective in this cell-cell adhesion function.  Go to: Results The extracellular domain of PTPρ mediates cell-cell aggregation in Sf9 cells  To test whether PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell adhesion, we made the following PTPρ baculoviral constructs expressing: (1) full-length PTPρ; (2) the intracellular fragment of PTPρ (Intra); (3) the extracellular fragment of PTPρ with its transmembrane domain (Extra-TM); (4) the extracellular fragment of PTPρ with its transmembrane, juxtamembrane and wedge domains (Extra-JMD-W); (5) a chimera containing the extracellular and transmembrane domains of the EGF receptor and the intracellular PTP domains of PTPρ (Fig. 1A). All of those fragments were tagged with V5 epitope tags. Proteins of the expected size were expressed in Sf9 cells infected with those baculoviral constructs (Fig. 1B). All of these proteins, but the intracellular PTPρ, were expressed on the surface on Sf9 cells (Fig. 1C). To test whether these PTPρ recombinant proteins mediate cell-cell adhesion, a cell aggregation assay was performed following the procedure of Brady-Kalnay et al (9). Sf9 cells infected with a baculovirus encoding PTPμ, which was previously demonstrated to mediate cell-cell aggregation, were treated in parallel as a positive control (Fig. 2). As shown in Fig 2, the non-adhesive Sf9 cells expressing either the full-length PTPρ or PTPρ-JMD-W formed cell aggregates. On the contrary, Sf9 cells expressing either the intracellular fragments of PTPρ or the EGFR/PTPρ chimeras remained as a suspension of single cells (Fig 1C). These results indicate that the extracullar fragment of PTPρ play an important role in mediating cell-cell aggregation and the phosphatase activity of PTPρ is not required for this function. Surprisingly, although the construct that encodes the PTPρ extracellular fragment with the transmembrane domain sequences only (Extra-TM) was expressed on the cell surface (see Figure 7), this protein failed to mediate cell aggregation of Sf9 cells, suggesting that additional juxtamembrane sequences are required for either forming or stablizing the cell aggregates.  Figure 1 Figure 1 Expression of PTPρ constructs in Sf9 cells Figure 2 Figure 2 PTPρ mediates cell-cell aggregation Figure 7 Figure 7 Cell Surface Protein expression of PTPμ and the PTPρ mutant proteins PTPρ mediates highly specific homophilic cell-cell aggregation  To test whether PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation, one set of Sf9 cells were infected with virus expressing enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) and another set of Sf9 cells were co-infected with viruses expressing either the full-length PTPρ or red fluorescent protein (RFP). The GFP expressing cells were mixed with equal number cells expressing full-length PTPρ (co-expressing RFP) and the aggregation assays were performed. As shown in Fig 3A, the GFP labeled cells did not aggregate and did not contribute to the aggregates formed by cells expressing full-length PTPρ (RFP). These results strongly suggest that the aggregation of Sf9 cells expressing PTPρ is mediated through a homophilic interaction among PTPρ molecules in trans, but not through a heterophilic interaction between molecules expressed on the surface of Sf9 cells. Interestingly, the homophilic interaction of PTPρ is very specific. Although 63% of the amino acid sequences of the extracellular domain of PTPρ are identical with that of PTPRM (PTPμ), Sf9 cells expressing PTPρ (co-expressing RFP) did not aggregate with PTPμ expressing cells (co-expressing GFP) as shown in Fig. 3B.  Figure 3 Figure 3 PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation The tumor-derived PTPRT/PTPρ mutations in the MAM and Ig domains are defective in cell-cell aggregation  Several studies demonstrated that the MAM and Ig domains as well as the first two FNIII repeats of PTPμ are the minimal essential regions required for its homophilic interaction (13, 15, 17, 18). We identified 5 tumor-specific mutations that are located in the two domains (2). Among these five mutations, the F74S mutation is located in the MAM domain and the other four mutations (A209T, K218T, F248S and Y280H) are located in the Ig domain (Fig. 4A). To test whether these mutations affect their ability to mediate cell-cell aggregation in Sf9 cells, we engineered the five mutations by site-directed mutagenesis using the full-length PTPρ baculoviral construct as the template. The five mutant proteins are expressed at the expected size and at similar levels to wild-type PTPρ on a western blot (Fig. 4B), indicating that these mutations do not affect their protein stability. None of these mutations significantly alter their cell surface expression, as all five mutant PTPρ proteins showed strong plasma membrane staining (Fig. 4C and Fig. 7). However, as shown in Fig. 5, all mutant PTPρ proteins formed smaller aggregates than that of the wild-type PTPρ protein. To quantify the cells aggregates, percentage of cells that are incorporate into > 5-cell clusters were counted (as described in the material and methods section). As shown in Fig. 5, Sf9 cells expressing all the mutants formed significantly less aggregates than that of cells expressing wild-type PTPρ. The deletion construct of PTPρ lacking the two phosphatase domains (PTPρ Extra-JMD-W) and the K218T mutant exhibited similar levels of aggregation that were statistically less than wild-type PTPρ (p < 0.01). Taken together, our data demonstrated that the five tumor-derived mutations located the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ are deficient in cell-cell adhesion. Therefore, these mutations exhibit varying degrees of loss-of-function in cell adhesion.  Figure 4 Figure 4 Expression of tumor-derived PTPρ mutants in Sf9 cells Figure 5 Figure 5 Tumor-derived mutations of PTPρ are defective in cell-cell aggregation Mechanistically, the defect of the PTPρ mutations in cell-cell adhesion could be resulted from either impaired ability in homophilic binding or reduced cell surface expression. Although immunofluorescent staining indicated that those mutations do not alter cell surface expression qualitatively, it is imperative to quantify cell surface expression of mutant PTPρ proteins. As described in detail in the method section, baculovirus-infected Sf9 cell surface proteins were labeled with Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin and isolated on immobilized NeutrAvidin Gel. Western blots were performed with antibodies to PTPμ (SK18) or the V5 tag. The SK18 antibody recognizes the cytoplasmic domain of both PTPμ and PTPρ. The results shown in Fig. 7 demonstrate that full length PTPμ and the wild-type, mutant and deleted PTPρ proteins were expressed at the cell surface. As a control for a non-cell surface protein, the cytoplasmic intracellular domain of PTPμ (PTPμ-intra) was expressed that is detected by SK18 (9). PTPμ intra does not contain an extracellular domain and therefore is not biotinylated nor precipitated by the NeutrAvidin gel (Fig. 7). Quantitatively, the levels of cell surface expression of the 5 tumor-derived PTPρ mutations were similar to that of wild-type protein. If the cell surface expression level (CSE value) of wild-type PTPρ is arbitrarily assigned as 1, the CSE values of F74S, A209T, K218T, F248S and Y280H mutations were 2.3, 1.1, 1.6, 0.6 and 0.8 respectively. Interestingly, some PTPρ mutants that contain the extracellular domain but are unable to mediate cell-cell aggregation are expressed at higher levels on the Sf9 cell surface than wild-type PTPρ. These results suggest that defect of PTPρ mutation in cell-cell adhesion is mainly due to reduced homophilic binding affinity of the mutant proteins. Interestingly, the cell surface expression levels PTPρ Extra-TM (CSE value = 27) and PTPρ Extra-JMD-W (CSE value = 20) were much higher than that of full-length protein for unknown reasons.  Go to: Discussion We demonstrated that PTPRT/PTPρ meditates homophilic cell-cell aggregation and five tumor-derived mutations located in the MAM and Ig domains impair this function. Our results strongly suggest that those PTPρ loss-of-function mutations are selected for during the process of tumor development; therefore, these mutations should play a causal role in tumorigenesis. We chose to examine whether the MAM and Ig domain mutations are deficient in cell aggregation, because previous studies indicated that these two domains of PTPμ, a close homolog of PTPρ, are required for its cell-cell aggregation function (13, 15, 17). Recently, the crystal structure of the N-terminal MAM and Ig domains of PTPμ was determined at 2.7 Å resolution (17, 18). Five tumor-derived mutations of PTPρ are located in the two domains and all of them can be mapped to equivalent residues in the MAM and Ig domain structure of PTPμ. Based on the crystal structure, the authors predicted that 4 of them (F74S, A209T, F248S and Y280H) would cause significant perturbation of the structure of PTPRT, because these mutations dramatically alter the character of buried side-chains (17). Moreover, the fifth mutation K218T is located on the surface of the Ig domain and the authors predicted that this mutation would directly alter protein-protein interactions (17). Our data indicated that the K218T mutation affects the size of aggregates and only a small effect on the percentage of cells incorporated into the aggregates, suggesting that the K218T mutant may decrease the binding affinity of PTPρ. Interestingly, the other four mutations significantly reduce the percentage of aggregation, therefore, these data suggest that the F74S, A209T, F248S and Y280H mutations dramatically alter the domain structure and lead to perturbation of the homophilic interaction of PTPρ. Our previous studies showed that the tumor-derived phosphatase domain mutations of PTPρ diminish its phosphatase activity and overexpression of PTPρ suppresses the growth of colorectal cancer cells, indicating that PTPρ normally act as a tumor suppressor (2). The loss-of-function nature of these five extracellular mutations provides further supportive evidence to this notion.  The finding that PTPρ mediates homophilic cell aggregation of non-adhesive insect Sf9 cells suggests that this protein could be involved in cell-cell adhesion in human epithelial cells where it is endogenously expressed. The type IIB RPTP subfamily consists of PTPμ, PTPκ, PTPρ and PCP-2. It has been shown that PTPμ, PTPκ and PTPλ (PCP-2), mediate homophilic cell-cell adhesion (9–12). Interestingly, the homophilic interaction of these RPTPs seems to be highly specific, because we and others showed that neither PTPρ nor PTPκ (15) interact with PTPμ. It is worth noting that the juxtamembrane domain of PTPρ may be necessary for its cell adhesion function. As shown in Figure 2, Sf9 cells expressing the extracellular and juxtamembrane domains of PTPρ, but not cells expressing the extracellular and transmembrane portion of the protein (PTPρ Extra-TM), formed cell aggregates, although both proteins were expressed on the cell surface (Fig. 7). Expression of a construct encoding the extracellular, transmembrane and only 55 amino acids of the juxtamembrane domain of PTPμ in non-adhesive Sf9 insect cells induced cell aggregation (9). It is possible that cis interactions between the membrane proximal juxtamembrane domains are required for initiating, stabilizing or maintaining cell-cell adhesion. Interestingly, there are two PTPRT mutations (K788E and R790I) located in the juxtamembrane domain that are found in lung cancers (1). Moreover, Besco et al. showed that PTPρ interacts with cell adhesion molecules including E-cadherin, α, β, and γ-catenin, and α;-actinin (19). PTPμ also binds the cadherin-catenin complex (7, 20–22). Loss of cell-cell adhesion, such as genetic and epigenetic inactivation of cell adhesion molecule E-cadherin, is thought to be a prerequisite for carcinoma invasion and metastasis (23). Therefore, mutational inactivation of the cell adhesion function PTPρ may also play a critical role in tumor migration and metastasis.
52||Protein tyrosine phosphatase ρ (PTPρ) belongs to the classical receptor type IIB family of protein tyrosine phosphatase, the most frequently mutated tyrosine phosphatase in human cancer. There are evidences to suggest that PTPρ may act as a tumor suppressor gene and dysregulation of Tyr phosphorylation can be observed in diverse diseases, such as diabetes, immune deficiencies and cancer. PTPρ variants in the catalytic domain have been identified in cancer tissues. These natural variants are nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms, variations of a single nucleotide occurring in the coding region and leading to amino acid substitutions. In this study we investigated the effect of amino acid substitution on the structural stability and on the activity of the membrane-proximal catalytic domain of PTPρ. We expressed and purified as soluble recombinant proteins some of the mutants of the membrane-proximal catalytic domain of PTPρ identified in colorectal cancer and in the single nucleotide polymorphisms database. The mutants show a decreased thermal and thermodynamic stability and decreased activation energy relative to phosphatase activity, when compared to wild- type. All the variants show three-state equilibrium unfolding transitions similar to that of the wild- type, with the accumulation of a folding intermediate populated at ∼4.0 M urea.  Go to: Introduction The classical protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) superfamily includes 38 proteins which specifically dephosphorylate phosphotyrosine residues and, in concert with protein tyrosine kinases, control a large number of diverse biological processes, such as cell proliferation, adhesion, apoptosis and migration [1]–[6]. Reversible tyrosine phosphorylation controls numerous signaling pathways which require a right balance between kinase and phosphatase activity. The involvement of PTP in controlling cellular signaling has been largely recognized [2], [5], [7], though the role of PTP in human diseases has not been explored so extensively as that of protein kinases. However in diverse diseases, such as cancer, diabetes and immune deficiencies, dysregulation of Tyr phosphorylation has been observed [4], [7], [8].  On the basis of their counteracting activity on the oncogenic protein tyrosine kinase, PTPs have been initially considered as potential tumor suppressors, however it is clear that several phosphatases have oncogenic properties [2]–[6], [9]. Over the last decade a limited number of phophatases have been studied systematically to evaluate their role in tumorigenesis. In particular, six mutated phosphatases have been directly linked to colorectal cancers [1], [10]; among the six mutated genes, the PTPRT gene encoding PTPρ (PDB accession code 2OOQ) was found to be most frequently mutated and it was also mutated in about 20% of lung and gastric cancer [10].  PTPρ belongs to the classical receptor type IIB family of PTP. The 107 PTPs encoded by the human genome are classified into four classes, on the basis of the amino acid sequence of their catalytic domain. Class I includes 61 dual-specificity phosphatases and 38 classical phosphotyrosine-specific phosphatase which are further divided into receptor and non-transmembrane groups [5], [7]. The full-length PTPρ contains an extracellular domain, formed by a meprin-A5 antigen-PTP (MAM) domain and Ig-like and fibronectin type III-like repeats, a single transmembrane segment and one or two cytoplasmic catalytic domains. The catalytically active proximal D1 domain is adjacent to the membrane and is connected to the inactive membrane-distal D2 domain [3], [5]. The PTP membrane-proximal catalytic domain consists of about 280 residues that fold into a highly conserved α/β structure [4], [11]. Conserved functional elements of the catalytic PTP domain are the PTP signature motif, the mobile “WPD” loop, a highly conserved aspartate residue required for catalysis and the phosphotyrosine recognition loop.  In cancer tissues several PTPρ variants in the catalytic domain have been identified and there is evidence to suggest that PTPρ may act as a tumor suppressor gene [10]. These natural variants are nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs), single nucleotide variations occurring in the coding region and leading to a polypeptide sequence with amino acid substitutions.  A large number of amino acid substitutions originate from nsSNPs and an increasingly large number of diseases and defects reported in Human Gene Mutation Database [12] and Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) [13] are referred to nsSNPs [14]. Although most nsSNPs are considered not to affect protein function, computational analysis predicts that around 30% of protein variants resulting from nsSNPs are less stable than the most common variant [15]. The effect of disease-causing nsSNPs on protein structure and function has been widely investigated by computational analysis, and change in protein stability has been suggested as the most common mechanism involved in monogenic disease [16]–[18]. However, nsSNPs may also affect and modulate the protein function by altering protein dynamics without affecting protein stability [19]. Notably, since genetic variations related to nsSNPs may influence individual susceptibility to complex diseases such as cancer [20] or response to drugs, a more extended study about the effect of nsSNPs on protein structure may help in understanding their role in inducing protein functional changes [21]. To date there are few experimental data available concerning the consequences of nsSNPs on protein function and stability.  In this study we investigate the effect of amino acid substitutions identified in colorectal cancer [10] and in the single nucleotide polymorphisms database [18], [22], [23] on the thermodynamic stability and on the activity of the membrane-proximal catalytic domain of PTPρ [1], [24]. The analysis revealed that, in comparison to the wild-type, the thermal and thermodynamic stability of all the mutants are decreased as well as the activation energy relative to the phosphatase activity, indicating an increase in protein flexibility of all the PTPρ mutants. All the variants show three-state equilibrium unfolding transitions similar to that of the wild-type, with the accumulation of a folding intermediate at ∼4.0 M urea.  To our knowledge, this study represents the first spectroscopic and thermodynamic characterization of human PTPρ catalytic domain and some of its mutants found in cancer. In addition, the effects of none of the mutations reported in this manuscript on protein thermodynamic stability has been previously investigated.  Go to: Results Four mutations of the PTPρ membrane-proximal catalytic domain in public databases have been identified: D927G, Q987K, N1128I and A1118P. Introduction of these mutations resulted in soluble recombinant protein only for D927G, Q987K and N1128I whereas the A1118P mutant could not be expressed in the soluble fraction even when different growth and induction conditions were used. Mapping of the mutations onto the structure of the PTPρ catalytic domain revealed that A1118P is located in the middle of a central helix (Fig. 1). It is likely that the introduction of a proline residue at this position in substitution of alanine will break the helical secondary structure resulting in misfolding of the catalytic domain. N1128 is located at the C-terminal end of the same helix (Fig. 1B). This residue is located in a very polar environment with flanking acidic (E1124, E1127, E1129) and a histidine residue (H974) located in a neighbouring loop region. D927G and Q987K are located in solvent exposed loops with little interaction with other amino acid side chains (Fig. 1C). The solvent accessibility of the mutated residues Asp-927 and Gln-987 is more than 70% and Asn-1128 is 49% solvent exposed. The mutation D927G involves a residue (Asp-927) placed in a 4 residues turn between two coils. In the wild-type Asp-927 connects different protein secondary structure regions through hydrogen bonds with three residues. One hydrogen bond is between the N of the peptide bond and the OD2 of Asp-947 and the other two hydrogen bonds are between the carbonyl of the peptide bond and the amidic nitrogens of Lys-930 and Glu-931. The carboxylic moiety of Asp-927 is completely solvent exposed and does not apparently make any contact with other residues.  Figure 1 Figure 1 Location of PTPρ mutations. Spectroscopic characterization of PTPρ wild-type and its mutants  The near-UV CD spectrum of wild-type PTPρ shows the contribution of all aromatic residues and is characterized by two negative components centred at 280 nm and at around 298 nm accompanied by fine structure features at 275–280 nm (Fig. 2A). Q987K variant displays a near-UV CD spectrum almost identical to that of the wild-type as well as D927G and N1128I, which nevertheless show a slight decrease of the dichroic activity at 275–280 nm. In line with the near-UV CD results, which suggest a similar tertiary arrangement for the wild-type and all the variants, the fluorescence emission spectra of mutants are similar to that of wild-type protein, being all centred at the same maximum emission wavelength around 338 nm but characterized by a decreased emission fluorescence intensity (Fig. 2B). Far-UV CD spectra of all the PTPρ mutants superimpose well with that of the wild-type and are typical of an alpha and beta protein, showing a local minimum at around 208 nm, a 200 nm zero intercept and a 1.13 ratio of the 208/222 bands (Fig. 2C). These results indicate that the SNP mutations had no effect on the secondary structure of the protein and suggest that, in the native state, the effect of the mutations are directed and localized to the mutated residue with minor modification of tertiary arrangements.  Figure 2 Figure 2 Spectroscopic properties of PTPρ wild-type and mutants. Thermal unfolding  The thermal stability of D927G, Q987K and N1128I was investigated by continuously monitoring the ellipticity changes at 209 nm between 10 and 72°C in comparison with that of wild-type (Fig. 3). The parameter chosen to compare the transition curves of PTPρ wild-type and mutants is the melting temperature (Tm) defined as the mid point of the denaturation process calculated by plotting the first derivative of the molar ellipticity values as a function of temperature (Fig. 3, inset). The temperature-induced ellipticity changes at 209 nm, where the main amplitude was observed, occur in an apparent cooperative transition for PTPρ wild-type, Q987K, N1128I and D927G, and with apparent Tm values of 43.0, 42.0, 41.0 and 40.0°C, respectively. The temperature-induced ellipticity changes for wild type and mutants are all coincident with the heat-induced increase of the photomultiplier tube voltage (PMTV) above 370 V (Fig. 3B), suggesting that the temperature-induced unfolding is accompanied by protein aggregation [25]. Aggregation occurred also when thermal scans were performed at a lower heating rate with a low-temperature shifts of the apparent Tm; the differences between the apparent Tm of wild type and variants were the same as those measured at higher heating rate (data not shown). The observed transitions are irreversible as indicated by the spectra measured at the end of the cooling phase that differ from those of the native proteins measured at the beginning of the thermal transitions (data not shown). Furthermore, inspection of the cuvette at the end of the cooling phase revealed the presence of a large amount of precipitate in all the samples.  Figure 3 Figure 3 Thermal transition of PTPρ wild-type and mutants. Temperature dependence of phosphatase activity  The temperature dependence of phosphatase activity of PTPρ wild-type and variants was examined over the temperature range of 10–42°C (Fig. 4A). The optimal temperatures were estimated to be at 37°C for wild type and Q987K, at around 33°C for N1128I and at 30°C for D927G (Fig. 4A). Notably, at 37°C, the phosphatase activity of all PTPρ variants is significantly reduced and corresponds to 72, 54 and 20% of that of the wild-type protein for Q987K, N1128I and D927G, respectively. The activation energy, Ea‡, determined by the Arrhenius equation (1) in the temperature range between 10°C and the optimal temperature of each protein, corresponds to 13.88±0.40 kcal/mol for the wild-type and to 12.77±0.51, 10.73±0.54 and 11.38±0.46 kcal/mol for N1128I, D927G and Q987K (Fig. 4B), respectively. This result suggests an increased flexibility of all the variants compared to the wild-type, particularly evident for N1128I and D927G whose phosphatase activity is significantly decreased at 42°C. The comparison of temperature dependence of phosphatase activity with the structural thermal unfolding monitored at 209 nm clearly indicates that the D927G and N1128I variants are significantly more flexible and less thermal resistant than the wild-type.  Figure 4 Figure 4 Effect of temperature on phosphatase activity of PTPρ wild-type and mutants. Urea-induced equilibrium unfolding transitions  PTPρ wild-type and variants reversibly unfold in urea at 10°C in 20 mM TrisHCl, pH 7.5, containing 200 µM DTT and 0.2 M NaCl. The effect of increasing urea concentrations (0–8 M) on the structure of PTPρ mutants was analyzed by far-UV CD and intrinsic fluorescence emission spectroscopy and compared to the wild-type.  Incubation of PTPρ wild-type and variants at increasing urea concentrations at 10°C for 30 min, a time sufficient to reach the equilibrium, resulted in a progressive change of the intrinsic fluorescence emission intensity and a red-shift of the maximal emission wavelength. At the end of the transition, above 7 M urea, the intrinsic fluorescence emission intensity is increased about 1.5 fold and the maximal fluorescence emission wavelength shifts to around 358 nm either for the wild-type and all the variants (Fig. 5). Determination of the red-shift of the intrinsic fluorescence emission was obtained by calculating the intensity averaged emission wavelength An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name is pone.0032555.e001.jpg at increasing urea concentration (Fig. 6A). This parameter is an integral measurement, negligibly influenced by the noise, and reflects changes in both the shape and the position of the emission spectrum.  Figure 5 Figure 5 Intrinsic fluorescence emission spectra of PTPρ wild-type and mutants. Figure 6 Figure 6 Urea-induced equilibrium unfolding of PTPρ wild-type and mutants. The same samples used to monitor the fluorescence emission changes during the unfolding transition were used to monitor far-UV CD ellipticity (Fig. 6A). The unfolding process is fully reversible upon dilution of the denaturant, either for the wild-type as well as for all the mutants (Fig. 6A). The urea-induced changes in intensity averaged emission wavelength An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name is pone.0032555.e003.jpg and in 222 nm ellipticity of all the mutants are similar to that of the wild-type and show a sigmoidal dependence on urea concentration, following an apparent two-state transition. However, the transitions monitored by ellipticity changes and An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name is pone.0032555.e004.jpg changes do not coincide (Fig. 6A) suggesting the possible presence of an intermediate in the transition region at approximately 4 M urea for the wild-type and for all the variants. The plot of the relative fluorescence intensity changes versus urea concentration shows a complex dependence upon increasing denaturant concentration for the wild-type and all the mutants (Fig. 6B). The data in Fig. 6B clearly indicate a non two-state unfolding process and the population of a denaturation intermediate at about the same urea concentration of the apparent denaturation midpoints observed by ellipticity and An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name is pone.0032555.e005.jpg averaged changes (Fig. 6 A and B). The folding intermediate detected by relative fluorescence intensity is populated at around 4.45 M urea for wild-type and Q987K and at around 3.95 M urea for D927G and N1128I. The intrinsic fluorescence emission spectra of the folding intermediate are similar for all the proteins: the fluorescence intensity is increased of about 1.5 fold and the maximum emission wavelength is shifted from 338 to 345 nm, with respect to the native state (Fig. 5). The hyperfluorescent intermediate of wild-type and variants retains about 35% of the 222 nm ellipticity of the native state (Fig. 6A).  The transitions monitored by relative fluorescence intensity changes (Fig. 6B) were fitted to a three-state unfolding process which yielded the thermodynamic parameters for wild-type and the variants of PTPρ (Table 1). For the first transition, m values are all closely similar to that of the wild-type, suggesting a similar unfolding mechanism for all the variants; ΔG values lower than that of the wild-type are observed for N1128I and D927G, suggesting a destabilization of the native state for these two variants, that also show a decreased thermal stability (see Fig. 3 and and4).4). For the second transition, that represents the unfolding of the intermediate to the denatured state, the m values of all the proteins are lower than those of the first transition, indicating that a larger increase in solvent-exposed surface area occur in the unfolding from the native to the intermediate state (Table 1). Notably, ΔG values relative to the second unfolding transition for N1128I and Q987K are larger than those relative to the first transition, suggesting a higher stability of the intermediate states, compared to that of the wild-type.  Table 1 Table 1 Thermodynamic parameters for urea-induced unfolding equilibrium of PTPρwild-type and mutants. The near-UV CD changes of D927G, the most temperature sensitive variant, upon increasing urea concentrations were monitored in comparison with wild-type (Fig. 7) to better characterize the nature of the intermediate state. The resulting data were analyzed after removal of the high-frequency noise and the low-frequency random error by a singular value decomposition algorithm (SVD) which resolved two main spectra components either for wild-type or for the mutant D927G. The most significant singular values were 2.05×103 for wild-type and 1.96×103 for D927G, the second singular values were 38.2% and 40.1% of the first singular value for wild-type and D927G, respectively. The plots of the first (V1) and of the second column (V2) of the V matrix which reflect the global change in the 250–320 nm region as a function of urea concentration show non-two state transition profiles comparable to the transitions monitored by intrinsic fluorescence emission intensity and confirm the accumulation of an intermediate at around 4.2 M urea (Fig. 7 B, and C). At this denaturant concentration, the near-UV CD spectra of wild-type and D927G significantly differ from those of the native state and are completely opposite in sign (Fig. 7A). The 298 nm negative band is lost and a positive contribution at 289 nm is present in the spectra of the intermediate state of both proteins. Furthermore, the 280–260 nm region, dominated by contribution of Phe and Tyr residues, in D927G is less defined than the wild-type (Fig. 7A). The data clearly indicate that both the spectral components of the wild-type and D927G contribute to the urea induced transitions with the accumulation of a denaturation intermediate at the same urea concentration range observed by monitoring intrinsic fluorescence intensity (Fig. 5 and Fig. 6B).  Figure 7 Figure 7 Effect of urea on near-UV CD spectra of PTPρ wild-type and D927G. The urea-induced unfolding transitions monitored by far-UV CD ellipticity changes are non-coincident with those monitored by fluorescence (Fig. 6) and near-UV CD (Fig. 7). To identify the number of spectral components contributing to the urea-induced ellipticity changes, far-UV CD spectra were analysed after removal of the high-frequency noise and the low-frequency random error by SVD. The global changes in the spectral region 213–250 nm, analyzed by SVD, indicate that only two spectral components contribute to the far-UV CD spectra of wild-type and all the variants. The most significant singular values are very similar for wild-type and all the variants and range between 1.76×105 and 1.67×105. The second singular values are 19.8% of the first singular value for the wild-type, 16.6% for the D927G variant, 11.2% for Q987K and 8.0% for N1128I. All the other singular values are below 7.0% of the largest singular value and progressively decrease approaching to zero. The plots of the first column of the V matrix (V1), which reflect the global change in the 213–250 nm region, as a function of urea concentration (data not shown) show sigmoidal transition profiles comparable to the transitions monitored at 222 nm for the wild-type and the variants (data not shown). Non cooperative changes of V2 at increasing denaturant are observed. Furthermore, the reconstituted spectra of the first spectral component superimposed well with those of the sum of the first and the second spectral component (data not shown), indicating that only the first spectral component contributed to the urea induced transitions monitored by ellipticity at 222 nm. These results indicate an apparent two-state process for far-UV CD unfolding transitions of wild-type and variants. Thus the data have been globally fitted to a two-state model according to equation 4 with the m parameter shared between all the data sets. The free energy of unfolding, ΔGH2O, of wild-type and mutants obtained from the global fitting are very similar and correspond to 3.56±0.09, 3.63±0.10, 3.65±0.10 and 3.82±0.07 kcal/mol for wild-type, N1128I, D927G and Q987 K, respectively, for a shared m value of 1.06±0.05 kcal/mol/M. Equilibrium unfolding of PTPρ wild-type and variants occurs via a hyperfluorescent intermediate state that cannot be detected by far-UV CD. Hence, the thermodynamic folding intermediate may represent a conformational change which occurs in the proximity of any of the tryptophans most likely due to an increase of native state flexibility [26].  Go to: Discussion PTPρ, which belongs to the classical receptor type IIB family of PTP, is one of the most frequently mutated PTP in human cancers [1], [24]. In this study we investigated the effect of amino acid substitution on the thermal and thermodynamic stability and on the activity, of the membrane-proximal catalytic D1 domain of PTPρ. Catalytically active fragments of several PTPs of type IIB family are proteolytically cleaved and released within the cytoplasm of tumour cells [27]–[29], hence the biophysical characterization of this catalytic domain may be relevant. The D1 domain is a monomeric, structurally independent and stable folding unit characterized by a high thermodynamic stability. In this study, we selected PTPρ mutations of D1 domain found in colorectal cancers [10] and reported in nsSNP database [14], D927G, Q987K, A1118P and N1128I. All the mutants are expressed as soluble recombinant proteins, except A1118P which remains insoluble also upon different growth and induction conditions. The spectroscopic properties of the wild-type compared with those of all the variants indicate that the mutations D927G, Q987K and N1128I had no effect on protein secondary structure with minor modifications of tertiary arrangements.  All the mutants show a decrease in the thermal stability and in the activation energy for phosphatase activity with respect to the wild-type indicating an increase in protein flexibility of all the mutants. Hence, at 37°C the phosphatase activity of all the variants was significantly reduced, similarly to what reported by Wang et al. for Q987K and N1128I [10]. The most destabilizing mutation, D927G, yielded a protein that at physiological temperature was almost completely inactive.  All the mutations studied here are located at very diverse positions in the structure, distant from the catalytic site and, except A1118P, in solvent-exposed loop regions. Presumably, the change in main chain flexibility caused by the most destabilizing D927G mutation may lead to local disorder and may affect the stabilizing hydrogen bonds of residues in close proximity (Asp-947, Lys-930 and Glu-931). This hypothesis is in agreement with the changes in local environment of aromatic residues suggested by the comparison of the near-UV CD spectrum of D927G with that of the wild-type. The N1128I mutation is less destabilizing than D927G. In the wild-type structure N1128, about 50% solvent accessible, is located in a very polar environment at the C-terminus of helix 8 and is involved, through its peptidic nitrogen, in a hydrogen bond with the peptide carbonyl of Asp-1124. The susbtitution of a polar residue, Asn-1128, to a nonpolar residue, Ile, may also contribute to destabilize the N1128I mutant. Q987K is the least destabilizing mutation with regard to thermal stability and temperature dependence of phosphatase activity, probably due to the fact that Gln-987 in the wild-type structure is not involved in any interaction with other protein residues.  All the variants, as revealed by intrinsic fluorescence emission intensity, show three-state equilibrium unfolding transitions similar to that of the wild-type, with the accumulation of a hyperfluorescent intermediate at ∼4.0 M urea that retains 35% of the native secondary structure ellipticity. The hyperfluorescent intermediate of wild-type and of D927G, the most temperature sensitive variant, contains tertiary contacts, although the packing of aromatic side-chains appears different from that of the native state.  The reversibility of the urea-induced unfolding equilibrium at low temperature allows a quantitative determination of the effect of mutations on the thermodynamic parameters of PTPρ catalytic domain. The destabilizing effect of mutations caused by nsSNPs on PTPρ thermodynamic stability (Table 1) may be referred i) to a destabilization of the native state for N1128I and D927G, as indicated by the values of ΔGH2OI-N lower than that of the wild-type, and ii) to a stabilization of the intermediate for all the variants, as suggested by the higher free energy of unfolding from the intermediate to the unfolded state (ΔGH2OU-I), with respect to that of the wild-type (Table 1). The destabilizing effect of D927G and N1128I substitutions is also evident from the decrease in melting temperature monitored by secondary structure changes and from the significant reduction of phosphatase activity at 37°C that suggests a higher flexibility of the two variants with respect to the wild-type.  The reversible equilibrium unfolding transitions monitored by far-UV CD are not coincident with those monitored by near-UV CD and intrinsic fluorescence emission intensity and do not reveal any denaturation intermediate. The thermodynamic parameters relative to the apparent two-state equilibrium unfolding measured by far-UV CD do not indicate any significant difference between the variants and the wild-type and are lower than those determined by intrinsic fluorescence emission intensity. In particular, the shared m value of 1.06 kcal/mol/M calculated from global fitting of the far-UV CD equilibrium unfolding data is significantly lower than the predicted m value for a monomeric protein of 280 amino acid residues unfolded in urea which is 3.71±0.3 kcal/mol/M [30], a value closely similar to that measured by fluorescence intensity. As a matter of fact, fluorescence intensity is extremely sensitive to the microenvironment of a fluorophore and is considered as the most straightforward signal that can be related to thermodynamics of unfolding transitions [31]. The discrepancy between the thermodynamic parameters obtained by far-UV CD and fluorescence intensity and the lack of a detectable intermediate by far-UV CD may indicate that the hyperfluorescent intermediate state represents conformational changes which occur in the proximity of any of the tryptophans, with an alternative tertiary arrangement. In the native state, the maximum emission wavelength (λmax = 338 nm) indicate that tryptophan residues are shielded from the solvent, whereas a partial exposure of tryptophan residues to the solvent is observed for the intermediate (λmax = 345 nm). These results are in agreement with the structural data which indicate that in PTPρ two out of the five tryptophans, Trp-994 and Trp-998, are located in the same helical region (helix 6) and Trp-926, Trp-1023 and Trp-1072 are placed in coil regions. All the five tryptophans are almost completely buried. In the native state the solvent accessibility of the five chromophores is 15% for Trp-998, 14% for Trp-926 and 4% for Trp-1023, whereas all the other tryptophan residues are completely buried. Hence, at approximately 4.0 M urea, it is impossible to assign to any of the five chromophores a particular role in the fluorescence properties of the intermediate state.  In conclusion our results revealed a destabilizing and inactivating role of the mutations of PTPρ D1 domain found in colorectal cancers [10]. All the amino acid mutations studied here are on the surface of PTPρ and could potentially participate in protein-protein interactions. The stabilization of a folding intermediate, coincident with an alternative tertiary arrangement, may play a role in recognition and interaction with other substrate proteins as well as in sensitivity of this phosphatase to degradation.
53||The receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase T (PTPRT/PTPρ) is the most frequently mutated tyrosine phosphatase in human cancer. PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation. In its extracellular region, PTPρ has cell adhesion molecule-like motifs, including a MAM domain, an immunoglobulin domain and four fibronectin type III (FNIII) repeats. Tumor-derived mutations have been identified in all of these extracellular domains. Previously, we determined that tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and immunoglobulin domains of PTPρ reduce homophilic cell-cell aggregation. In this manuscript, we describe experiments in which we evaluated the contribution of the FNIII repeats to PTPρ-mediated cell-cell adhesion. Our results demonstrate that deletion of the FNIII repeats of PTPρ result in defective cell-cell aggregation. Furthermore, all of the tumor-derived mutations in the FNIII repeats of PTPρ also disrupt cell-cell aggregation. These results further support the hypothesis that mutational inactivation of PTPρ may lead to cancer progression by disrupting cell-cell adhesion.  Keywords: Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase, PTPRT, PTPρ, fibronectin type III repeat, cell-cell aggregation, cell-cell adhesion Go to: 1. Introduction Cancer progression and metastasis is in part influenced by changes in cell adhesion and tyrosine phosphorylation mediated by cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) (Paschos et al. 2009; Wheelock et al. 2008), as well as tyrosine kinases and tyrosine phosphatases, respectively (Freiss and Vignon 2004; Ostman et al. 2006). Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatases (RPTPs) comprise a family of proteins that have extracellular CAM domains coupled to cytoplasmic tyrosine phosphatase domains, and thus can impact cancer progression by regulating both cell adhesion and tyrosine phosphorylation (Brady-Kalnay 2001; Ostman et al. 2006).  The type IIB PTPμ-like subfamily of RPTPs includes PTPμ, PTPρ, PTPκ, and PCP-2 (PTPλ) (Aricescu et al. 2008; Brady-Kalnay 2001). The extracellular segment of the PTPμ-like RPTPs contain motifs found in CAMs, including a MAM domain, an immunoglobulin (Ig) domain and four fibronectin type III (FNIII) repeats (Aricescu et al. 2008; Brady-Kalnay 2001; Ostman et al. 2006). PTPμ subfamily members bind homophilically (i.e. the “ligand” for PTPμ is an identical PTPμ molecule on an adjacent cell) (Brady-Kalnay et al. 1993; Cheng et al. 1997; Gebbink et al. 1993; Sap et al. 1994; Yu et al. 2008; Zondag et al. 1995). The Ig domain of PTPμ is responsible for promoting homophilic interactions (Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994), and proper cell surface localization (Del Vecchio and Tonks 2005). However, both the MAM and Ig domains as well as the first two FNIII repeats are required for efficient cell-cell adhesion of PTPμ (Aricescu et al. 2006; Aricescu et al. 2007; Aricescu et al. 2008; Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Cismasiu et al. 2004; Zondag et al. 1995). PTPρ and PTPκ also mediate homophilic cell-cell adhesion (Sap et al. 1994; Yu et al. 2008). However, PCP2 has not yet been demonstrated to mediate cell-cell adhesion or aggregation although in vitro binding studies indicate it can bind homophilically (Cheng et al. 1997).  All type IIB RPTPs are potential tumor suppressor genes (Burgoyne et al. 2009a; Flavell et al. 2008; McArdle et al. 2001; Yan et al. 2006). Notably, PTPρ is the most frequently mutated phosphatase gene in human cancers including colon, lung, skin and stomach cancers (Forbes et al. 2008; Wang et al. 2004). Defective adhesion mediated by PTPρ may be at least one mechanism of cancer progression. In fact, cancer derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ are defective in mediating cell-cell aggregation (Yu et al. 2008).  In addition to the tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ previously described (Wang et al. 2004; Yu et al. 2008), the majority of extracellular domain mutations are located in the FNIII repeats of PTPρ (Wang et al. 2004). Given the importance of FNIII repeats in PTPμ-mediated adhesion and aggregation (Aricescu et al. 2007), we tested the contribution of the FNIII repeats of PTPρ to PTPρ-mediated adhesion. We determined that deletion constructs where each of the extracellular domains of PTPρ is removed, including the FNIII repeats, are defective in mediating cell-cell aggregation of Sf9 cells. Furthermore, when we engineered the cancer-derived mutations in the FNIII repeats of these PTPρ mutant proteins, they also result in defective cell-cell aggregation. These results demonstrate the importance of the FNIII repeats in contributing to proper cell-cell adhesion and suggest that adhesion mediated by PTPρ is likely important for the tumor suppressor activity of PTPρ.  Go to: 2. Materials and methods 2.1 Baculovirus generation  Baculoviruses were generated by transfecting cells with the BaculoGold™ Linearized Baculovirus DNA (BD Biosciences, San Diego, CA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The baculovirus for wild-type PTPρ was previously described (Yu et al. 2008).  2.2 Sf9 cell culture  Insect Sf9 cells from (BD Biosciences) were maintained at 27°C in Graces Insect Medium (BD Biosciences). The medium was supplemented with 10% FBS from (Hyclone, Logan, UT) and Gentamicin (MP Biomedicals, Solon, OH). Viruses were added to Sf9 cell medium to induce the expression of proteins of interest. Cells were harvested 30 hours post-infection for further analysis.  2.3 Generation of PTPRT deletion constructs  The PTPρ-ΔMAM, PTPρ-ΔIg, PTPρ-ΔFNIII-1, PTPρ-ΔFNIII-2, PTPρ-ΔFNIII-3 and PTPρ-ΔFNIII-4 constructs were generated by fusion PCR using the full-length PTPRT pVL1393-V5-His vector as the template. The primers 5’-GAAGATCTATGGCGAGCCTCGCCGCG-3’ and 5’-CCGGAATTCGGATCCTGGGGCGCTCTGAGCCCGGG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔMAM construct; the primers 5’-GCGTGGGAGGCTCTCTGCATGGATGAGCAAGGAC-3’ and 5’-CAATGGGTCTTGCTCATCCATGCAGAGAGCCTCCCACGCCCATTG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔIg construct; the primers 5’-CTGCACACTTGGTCCTGGTTTTCACGATCAGCTCCGCGTA-3’ and 5’-TACGCGGAGCGTCGTGAAAACCAGGACCAAGTGTGCAG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-1 construct; the primers 5’-CCGCCAGGGCCTCCCCTCACCGAGGAAGACGTTCCAGGAG-3’ and 5’-CTCCTGGAACGTCTTCCTCGGTGAGGGGAGGCCCTGGCGG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-2 construct; the primers 5’-GAGGAGCTGGTGGTGCAGACTAAAATTTCAGCTCCATCCA-3’ and 5’-TGGATGGAGCTGAAATTTTAGTCTGCACCACCAGCTCCTC-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-3 construct and the 5’-GTCACCACTCGGATTGCCACCGGTGCCTCCACCCAGAATT-3’ and 5’-AATTCTGGGTGGAGGCACCGGTGGCAATCCGAGTGGTGAC-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-4 construct.  2.4 Immunoblotting  Sf9 cells were lysed in a standard lysis buffer (20 mM Tris·HCl, pH 7.5, 1% Triton X-100, 150 mM sodium chloride, 2 mM Benzamidine, 2.5μg/ml Aprotinin, 2.5μg/ml Leupeptin, and 0.5μg/ml Pepstatin). Samples were solubilized in 2X SDS loading buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE. Samples were transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (Whatman, Piscataway, NJ) and immunoblotted with SK18 (Brady-Kalnay et al. 1993), which cross-reacts with PTPρ.  2.5 Cell surface expression of PTPρ  Cell surface expression of PTPρ protein in baculovirus infected Sf9 cells was determined using a modified biotin-avidin reaction with the Cell Surface Protein Isolation Kit (catalog# 89991, Pierce, Rockford, IL), as previously described (Yu et al. 2008). Briefly, Sf9 cell media was removed and the flasks were incubated with rocking for 30 minutes at 4°C in 5ml of 0.25mg/ml Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin in 1X PBS. The cells were mechanically removed from the flask, centrifuged, washed, and lysed according to the manufacturer’s protocols. To isolate cell surface expressed PTPρ the cell lysate was added to a NeutrAvidin Gel column and incubated for 60 min at room temperature (RT) with rocking prior to washing and eluting proteins with 200μl of sample buffer containing a final concentration of 55mM DTT for 60min at RT. The flow through was run on 6% SDS-PAGE gels and transferred to nitrocellulose. Total cell surface protein levels were normalized by immunoblotting cell lysates with an anti-actin antibody (JLA20). The normalized cell surface protein was run on 6% SDS-PAGE gels, transferred to nitrocellulose and immunoblotted with antibodies to PTPμ that also recognized PTPρ (SK18) followed by secondary antibody conjugated to HRP. The HRP signal was detected using a Fluor-S MAX MultiImager (Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc., Hercules, CA).  2.6 Aggregation Assays  Sf9 cells were harvested by trituration. The cell suspensions were added to glass scintillation vials and incubated at 27°C at 90 rpm in a gyratory shaker for 30 minutes. For a given condition, the cell suspension was transferred to a 100mm petri dish either prior to (0 time point) or 30 minutes after aggregation. Images were captured at 10X magnification with a Nikon TE-200 inverted fluorescent microscope (Tokyo, Japan). To quantify cell aggregates, pictures of four randomly selected fields were taken per dish. The area of each object (single cells and aggregates) was determined by the Metamorph software (Molecular Devices) using an auto-threshold setting for light objects and appropriate size filters that allowed the counting of cells and aggregates but not debris. The four replicates were combined to yield average readings per condition. The percent aggregation was then calculated as the average aggregate area at 30 minutes minus the average aggregate area at zero minutes divided by the average aggregate area at 30 minutes [(N30-N0)/N30]. A minimum of three independent experiments was performed per condition. Statistical significance was determined in Microsoft Excel using Student’s T-test. Error bars indicate standard error.  2.7 Site-directed mutagenesis  The I395V, Y412F, R453C, Q479E, S492F, N510K, T605M, V648G, A707T, and L708P tumor-derived mutations (Wang et al. 2004) were generated by fusion PCR using the full-length PTPRT pVL1393-V5-His vector as the template. The primers 5’-TGGCCCACAGAACGTGGAAGTCGTAGACATCAGAGCC-3’ and 5’-CTTCCACGTTCTGTGGGCCA-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the I395V mutant; the primers 5’-CAGTGGGAGCCCTTCGGCTTCGCGGTGACCCGCTGCCAT-3’ and 5’-AAGCCGAAGGGCTCCCACTG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the Y412F mutant; the primers 5’-CTACACCCTGCGAGGCCTGTGCCCCTTCATGACCATCCG-3’ and 5’-ACAGGCCTCGCAGGGTGTAG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the R453C mutant; the primers 5’-GAGCGAGGAGCTGGTGGTGGAGACTGAGGAAGACGTTCC-3’ and 5’-CCACCACCAGCTCCTCGCTC-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the Q479E mutant; the primers 5’-TGTTCCTCTAGAATTCATCCAAGGGGGGCCCT TT-3’ and 5’-ATGAATTCTAGAGGAACA-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the S492F mutant; the primers 5’-TCCAGTGGAAACCTCCCAAGGAGACCAATGGGGTCATCA-3’ and 5’-CTTGGGAGGTTTCCACTGGA-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the N510K mutant; the primers 5’-CCATTGAATGAGACAGACATGACC ATCACAGTGATGCTG3-’ and 5’-ATGTCTGTCTCATTCAATGG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the T605M mutant; the primers 5’-ATTATTGAGTGCTTTTC GGGGCCCGTGAGCTATCGGAAT-3’ and 5’-CCCGAAAAGCACTCAATAAT-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the V648G mutant; the primers 5’-CTACAGCATCTACTTCCAGACACTCAGCAAAGCCAATGG-3’ and 5’-TCTGGAAGTAGATGCTGTAG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the A707T mutant; the primers 5’-AGCATCTACTTCCAGGCACCCAGCAAAGCCAATGGAGAG-3’ and 5’-GGTGCCTGGAAGTAGATGCT-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the L708P mutant.  2.8 Mapping of PTPρ mutations onto the PTPμ crystal structure  The sequence of PTPμ and PTPρ were aligned using CLUSTALW. Mutations probed in this study were mapped using this sequence alignment onto the PTPμ structure (PDB ID: 2V5Y). The figure was prepared utilizing PyMOL 1.2r1 (http://pymol.org).  Go to: 3. Results 3.1 Deletions in the MAM, Ig, and FNIII repeat domains of PTPρ result in defective cell-cell aggregation  To test whether a protein mediates cell-cell aggregation or adhesion, one has to express the protein of interest in the non-adhesive cells. Otherwise, one cannot measure the aggregation or adhesion of a single molecule in the sea of other adhesion molecules naturally expressed in adhesive cells. This is the main reason that the non-adhesive Sf9 or Drosophila S2 cells are widely used models for such studies. To our knowledge, nearly all cell lines of epithelial origin are adhesive cells and thus are not suitable for these studies. Introduction of putative adhesion molecules into non-adhesive Drosophila S2 insect cells has been used to demonstrate adhesive functions for fasciclin II, connectin, Dtrk, ARK, Neuroglian, and Capricious molecules directly (Bellosta et al. 1995; Hortsch et al. 1995; Nose et al. 1992; Pulido et al. 1992; Shinza-Kameda et al. 2006; Snow et al. 1989). In a similar approach, we and others demonstrated that the full-length form of PTPμ induced aggregation, via a homophilic binding mechanism, when expressed in nonadhesive Sf9 insect cells, which are derived from the Fall army-worm Spodoptera frugiperda (Brady-Kalnay et al. 1993; Gebbink et al. 1993; Zondag et al. 1995). We have also used this system for analyzing PTPRT/PTP rho (Yu et al., 2008). Examples of other cell adhesion molecules that have been studied in Sf9 cells include L1 (Gouveia et al. 2008), Galectin-3 (Inohara and Raz 1995) and C-CAM1 (Phan et al. 2001). Insect S2 and Sf9 cells are extremely useful systems to analyze adhesive mechanisms of cell adhesion molecules.  The MAM domain, Ig domain, and first two-FNIII repeats are essential for PTPμ cell-cell aggregation (Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Zondag et al. 1995). To test whether these domains are the minimal essential regions required for PTPρ cell-cell aggregation, baculoviral PTPρ deletion constructs of the MAM domain, Ig domain, and each of the four individual FNIII repeats were made and expressed in non-adhesive Sf9 insect cells (Figure 1). All the PTPρ deletion constructs were expressed and appropriately trafficked to the cell surface (Figure 1). To test whether these domains contribute to PTPρ-dependent adhesion, Sf9 cells were evaluated for their ability to mediate cell-cell aggregation when expressing the deletion constructs. Aggregation assays with Sf9 cells expressing the deletion constructs were conducted alongside aggregation assays using Sf9 cells expressing wild-type PTPρ, which mediates cell-cell aggregation (Figure 2) and serves as a positive control (Yu et al. 2008). Deletion of any of the extracellular domains of PTPρ resulted in defective cell-cell aggregation compared to aggregation of wild-type PTPρ expressing Sf9 cells (Figure 2). Deletion of the fourth FNIII repeat was the least severe where ~23% aggregation was observed. Deletion of the MAM domain, Ig domain and FNIII repeats 1, 2 or 3 resulted in 5–16% aggregation. When the level of aggregation was quantified, we determined that all of the deletion constructs resulted in a large and statistically significant reduction in cell-cell aggregation (Figure 2, p-value<0.005). Together with our previous study, these results demonstrate that all of the extracellular domains of PTPρ are necessary for PTPρ-mediated cell-cell aggregation.  Figure 1 Figure 1 PTPρ deletion constructs are all expressed at the cell surface. Constructs containing deletions of one extracellular domain of PTPρ each were generated and expressed in Sf9 cells. Total cellular protein and cell surface protein were isolated ... Figure 2 Figure 2 Deletion of any of the extracellular domains of PTPρ disrupts cell-cell aggregation. Sf9 cells expressing deletion constructs of the individual extracellular domains of PTPρ were allowed to aggregate for 30 minutes prior to imaging. Scale ... 3.2 Tumor-Derived PTPρ Mutations in the FNIII repeats result in defective cell-cell aggregation  We next tested the effects of human tumor-derived mutations in the FNIII repeats of PTPρ on PTPρ-mediated cell-cell aggregation. We recently demonstrated that tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ are defective in cell-cell aggregation using the Sf9 aggregation assay (Yu et al. 2008), and given the above results, we hypothesized that mutations in the FNIII domains would likewise result in defective aggregation. Ten human tumor-derived mutations are located in the second, third and fourth FNIII repeats of PTPρ (Wang et al. 2004). To test whether these mutations also affect cell-cell aggregation, we engineered the ten human mutations by site-directed mutagenesis using the full-length PTPρ baculoviral construct as a template (see Figure 3). The ten mutations are expressed in Sf9 cells at the expected molecular weight and at similar levels to full-length human PTPρ (Figure 3). All of these mutants are expressed at the cell surface (Figure 3). When these mutant PTPρ proteins were expressed in Sf9 cells and tested in aggregation assays, we observed that all of the mutant PTPρ proteins resulted in fewer and smaller aggregates than wild type PTPρ (Figure 4). When the level of aggregation was quantified, we determined that all of the FNIII mutations significantly reduced cell-cell aggregation (16–43%) compared to cells expressing wild type PTPρ (68% aggregation, p-value<0.008, Figure 4).  Figure 3 Figure 3 PTPρ proteins containing tumor-derived mutations in their FNIII domains are expressed at the cell surface. Ten mutations in the FNIII domains of PTPρ were generated by site-directed mutagenesis and expressed in Sf9 cells. Total cellular ... Figure 4 Figure 4 Tumor derived mutations in FNIII domains of PTPρ are defective in cell-cell aggregation. Sf9 cells expressing the mutated PTPρ proteins were allowed to aggregate for 30 minutes prior to imaging. Scale bar equals 100μm. The percentage ... Go to: 4. Discussion PTPRT/PTPρ is the most highly mutated tyrosine phosphatase in human colon carcinomas. We and others found that PTPRT/ PTPρ is also mutated in lung, gastric and skin (melanoma) cancers (Forbes et al. 2008; Wang et al. 2004). The spectrum of mutations, which included nonsense mutations and frameshifts, suggested that these mutations were inactivating (Wang et al. 2004). Biochemical analyses demonstrated that missense mutations in the catalytic domains of PTPRT diminished its phosphatase activity and overexpression of PTPRT inhibited colon cancer cell growth. Moreover, we showed previously that the tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ are defective in cell-cell adhesion (Yu et al. 2008). All these data suggest that PTPRT/PTPρ normally functions as a tumor suppressor gene. The experiments presented in this manuscript evaluate the contribution of the individual extracellular domains of PTPρ to PTPρ-mediated adhesion. We demonstrate that in addition to the MAM and Ig domains, the FNIII repeats are required for PTPρ-mediated adhesion. Importantly, we also show that PTPρ-mediated adhesion is impaired by human tumor-derived mutations in those FNIII repeats. These studies indicate that all the tumor-derived mutations located in the extracellular domain of PTPRT are loss-of-function mutations, thereby providing further evidence that PTPRT is a tumor suppressor. This notion is further supported by our recent study showing that PTPRT knockout mice are highly susceptible to colon specific carcinogen azoxymethane (AOM)-induced colon cancer (Zhao et al.).  PTPμ-mediated cell-cell aggregation requires the MAM domain, Ig domain, and the first two FNIII repeats (Aricescu et al. 2006; Aricescu et al. 2007; Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Cismasiu et al. 2004; Zondag et al. 1995). The entire extracellular domain of PTPμ is predicted to make a rigid conformation with extensive interfaces between each of the domains (Aricescu et al. 2006). The minimal adhesive unit for functional cell-cell aggregation is the MAM domain, Ig domain and the first two FNIII repeats (Aricescu et al. 2006; Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Zondag et al. 1995). However, the FNIII repeats appear to play a role in spacing the key homophilic interaction domain(s) a certain distance from the plasma membrane. Deletion of the FNIII repeats changed the intercellular spacing of two apposing membranes (Aricescu et al. 2007). Cell-cell aggregation assays of the FNIII deletion constructs were not performed in that study (Aricescu et al. 2007). The amino acid residues of the interfaces between the extracellular domains are highly conserved between members of the type IIB RPTP subfamily (Aricescu et al. 2006; Aricescu et al. 2007) therefore it is likely that the PTPρ adhesive interface resembles that of PTPμ. Together our data support the hypothesis that the essential regions for PTPρ-mediated adhesion resemble those of PTPμ.  To gain insight into how the point mutations may alter the adhesive function of PTPρ, we modeled the human tumor derived PTPρ mutations onto the crystal structure of PTPμ (Figure 5). The crystal structure of PTPμ includes only the first three FNIII repeats (Aricescu et al. 2007). Four of these mutations fall within the second FNIII (FNIII-2) repeat (I395V, Y412F, R453C, Q479E). It is important to note that FNIII-2 is required for efficient cell-cell adhesion (Aricescu et al. 2006). Two of the mutations fall in the third FNIII (FNIII-3) repeat (S492F, N510K). The mutation within the linker region between FNIII-1 and FNII-2 (Y412F) could alter the flexibility or positioning between the two domains. The other mutations (I395V R453C, Q479E, S492F, N510K) appear to be clustered in surface exposed regions and/or near the linker regions between FNIII-2 and FNIII-3 that could alter flexibility, position of individual FNIII repeats and/or protein-protein interactions. While these mutations do not correspond to the adhesive interface hypothesized for PTPμ based upon a single static crystal structure (Aricescu et al. 2007), some of the mutations fall within the FNIII-2 repeat which is required for adhesion, and all of these surface modifications would likely alter either the three-dimensional topology and/or cis/trans interactions of PTPρ.  Figure 5 Figure 5 Structural modeling of the point mutations of PTPρ. The point mutations (indicated in red) evaluated in this manuscript were modeled onto the equivalent sites in the crystal structure of PTPμ. The PTPρ mutations likely alter cell-cell ... Other type IIB RPTPs also function as tumor suppressor genes, by regulating adhesion and/or tyrosine phosphorylation of effector proteins. Expression of PTPμ is reduced in human glioblastomas (GBM) and cell lines (Burgoyne et al. 2009a). Reduction in full-length PTPμ expression with a concomitant increase in a proteolytically processed cytoplasmic fragment of PTPμ is observed in GBM cells and both are correlated with decreased adhesion and increased migration observed in the disease (Burgoyne et al. 2009a; Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Over-expression of the full-length form of PTPμ suppressed migration of GBM cells and reduces their survival (Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Of note, at the same time that stable cell adhesion is reduced due to the loss of full-length PTPμ expression in GBM cells, a catalytically active cytoplasmic fragment of PTPμ is released and translocates to the nucleus (Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Catalytic activity of this fragment is also necessary for cell migration and viability of GBM cells (Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Therefore, both the tyrosine phosphatase activity of the cytoplasmic fragment of PTPμ and the loss of PTPμ-mediated adhesion may contribute to the invasiveness of GBM cells.  PTPκ is also implicated in tumor progression. PTPκ expression is reduced in melanoma cell lines and human tissue biopsies (McArdle et al. 2001), and in Hodgkin’s lymphoma cells (Flavell et al. 2008). Over-expression of PTPκ in Hodgkin lymphoma cells reduces cellular proliferation and survival (Flavell et al. 2008). Like PTPμ, PTPκ is proteolytically processed (Anders et al. 2006), potentially as a result of aberrant glycosylation (Kim et al. 2006). It is not clear whether adhesion or catalytic activity of PTPκ is required for its tumor suppressor activity (Flavell et al. 2008; Kim et al. 2006). Of note, the cleaved cytoplasmic domain fragment of PTPκ is catalytically active, translocates to the nucleus and promotes β-catenin-mediated transcription (Anders et al. 2006). Signaling via the PTPκ cytoplasmic fragment might augment the loss of stable cell-cell adhesion and may promote tumor progression.  Although speculative, it is interesting to postulate that tyrosine phosphatase activity and or cleavage of PTPρ will also be an important element of its tumor suppressor activity, as has been demonstrated for PTPμ and PTPκ. Interestingly, we identified and validated STAT3 as a direct substrate of PTPRT (Zhang et al. 2007). STAT3 is latent transcription factor that translocates from the cytoplasm to the nucleus after being phosphorylated at the Y705 residue. It is possible that the cleaved intracellular fragment of PTPρ, which contains the phosphatase domains, translocates to nucleus and dephosphorylates STAT3. Besco and colleagues found that PTPRT associates with the adhesion molecule E-cadherin and its binding partner p120 catenin, which are PTPRT substrates (Besco et al. 2006). p120 also translocates to the nucleus and associates with the Kaiso transcription factor (Daniel and Reynolds 1999). Given the frequency and distribution of mutations in PTPRT/PTPρ in human colon and other cancers, a more thorough understanding of its biological function is warranted.
54||Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase T (PTPRT/PTPρ) is frequently mutated in human cancers including colon, lung, gastric and skin cancers. More than half of the identified tumor-derived mutations are located in the extracellular part of PTPρ. However, the functional significance of those extracellular domain mutations remains to be defined. Here we report that the extracellular domain of PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation. This homophilic interaction is very specific, as PTPρ does not interact with its closest homolog PTPμ in a cell aggregation assay. We further demonstrated that all 5 tumor-derived mutations located in the N-terminal MAM and Ig domains impair, to varying extents, their ability to from cell aggregates, indicating that those mutations are loss-of-function mutations. Our results suggest that PTPρ may play an important role in cell-cell adhesion and mutational inactivation of this phosphatase could promote tumor migration and metastasis.  Go to: Introduction Tyrosine phosphorylation is coordinately controlled by protein tyrosine kinases and phosphatases and is a central feature of many signaling pathways involved in tumor development (1). While activating mutations in protein tyrosine kinases have been shown to play vital roles in tumorigenesis (1), the role of phosphatases is less well-defined. We recently identified PTPRT, also known as PTPρ, as the most frequently mutated PTP gene in colorectal cancers (CRCs) (2). PTPRT was also mutationally altered in lung, gastric cancers and melanomas (2). The spectrum of mutations, which included nonsense mutations and frameshifts, suggested that these mutations were inactivating (2). Biochemical analyses demonstrated that missense mutations in the catalytic domains of PTPρ diminished its phosphatase activity and overexpression of PTPρ inhibited CRC cell growth (2). Taken together, these studies strongly supported the notion that PTPρ normally acts as a tumor suppressor gene. This conclusion was also supported by a transposon-based somatic mutagenesis screen in mice, wherein PTPρ was isolated as a target gene from two different mouse transgenic sarcomas (3).  PTPRT (PTPρ) is a member of the type IIB receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase (RPTP) subfamily (4). Other members of this subfamily include PTPRM (PTPμ), PTPRK (PTPκ) and PCP2 (also called PTPλ, PTPψ, PTPRO-omicron, PTPπ, hPTP-J) (5). These 4 RPTPs share the same domain structure: an extracelluar domain, a juxtamembrane region and two phosphatase domains (6). The extracellular domains of type IIB RPTPs have high sequence identities (7, 8), all consist of a MAM (memprin/A5/PTPμ) domain, an Ig domain, and four fibronectin type III (FNIII) repeats (6). The MAM domain is suggested to play a role in protein dimerization (6). The Ig domain is a disulfide structure that is found in many cell surface proteins and has been shown to mediate homophilic and heterophilic interactions between cell adhesion molecules (6). The FNIII motif was originally identified in the extracellular matrix protein fibronectin and later found to be present in many immunoglobulin superfamily cell adhesion molecules (6). We have identified ~15 somatic mutations that are localized in the extracellular domain of PTPRT/PTPρ. How these mutations affect the functions of PTPρ remains to be determined.  Three close homologs of PTPρ, PTPμ, PTPκ and PTPλ (PCP-2), are known to mediate homophilic cell-cell adhesion (9– 12). Expression of the full-length PTPμ (9) (10) or a construct encoding the extracellular, transmembrane and 55 amino acids of the juxtamembrane domain of PTPμ in non-adhesive Sf9 insect cells induces cell aggregation (9). Furthermore, homophilic binding of PTPμ was demonstrated between PTPμ-coated fluorescent beads and cells that endogenously express PTPμ (9). The minimal region required for homophilic binding was mapped to the Ig domain of PTPμ (13). In addition, the Ig domain is required for proper cell surface localization (14). However, assays that test cell-cell aggregation demonstrate that the MAM and Ig domains as well as the first two fibronectin type III repeats are required for efficient cell-cell aggregation (15– 18). Similarly, PTPκ was also demonstrated to mediate homophilic cell-cell aggregation (11). Here we report that PTPRT (PTPρ), like its homologs, mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation in Sf9 cells. Most importantly, the tumor-derived mutations located in the MAM and Ig domains are defective in this cell-cell adhesion function.  Go to: Results The extracellular domain of PTPρ mediates cell-cell aggregation in Sf9 cells  To test whether PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell adhesion, we made the following PTPρ baculoviral constructs expressing: (1) full-length PTPρ; (2) the intracellular fragment of PTPρ (Intra); (3) the extracellular fragment of PTPρ with its transmembrane domain (Extra-TM); (4) the extracellular fragment of PTPρ with its transmembrane, juxtamembrane and wedge domains (Extra-JMD-W); (5) a chimera containing the extracellular and transmembrane domains of the EGF receptor and the intracellular PTP domains of PTPρ (Fig. 1A). All of those fragments were tagged with V5 epitope tags. Proteins of the expected size were expressed in Sf9 cells infected with those baculoviral constructs (Fig. 1B). All of these proteins, but the intracellular PTPρ, were expressed on the surface on Sf9 cells (Fig. 1C). To test whether these PTPρ recombinant proteins mediate cell-cell adhesion, a cell aggregation assay was performed following the procedure of Brady-Kalnay et al (9). Sf9 cells infected with a baculovirus encoding PTPμ, which was previously demonstrated to mediate cell-cell aggregation, were treated in parallel as a positive control (Fig. 2). As shown in Fig 2, the non-adhesive Sf9 cells expressing either the full-length PTPρ or PTPρ-JMD-W formed cell aggregates. On the contrary, Sf9 cells expressing either the intracellular fragments of PTPρ or the EGFR/PTPρ chimeras remained as a suspension of single cells (Fig 1C). These results indicate that the extracullar fragment of PTPρ play an important role in mediating cell-cell aggregation and the phosphatase activity of PTPρ is not required for this function. Surprisingly, although the construct that encodes the PTPρ extracellular fragment with the transmembrane domain sequences only (Extra-TM) was expressed on the cell surface (see Figure 7), this protein failed to mediate cell aggregation of Sf9 cells, suggesting that additional juxtamembrane sequences are required for either forming or stablizing the cell aggregates.  Figure 1 Figure 1 Expression of PTPρ constructs in Sf9 cells Figure 2 Figure 2 PTPρ mediates cell-cell aggregation Figure 7 Figure 7 Cell Surface Protein expression of PTPμ and the PTPρ mutant proteins PTPρ mediates highly specific homophilic cell-cell aggregation  To test whether PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation, one set of Sf9 cells were infected with virus expressing enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) and another set of Sf9 cells were co-infected with viruses expressing either the full-length PTPρ or red fluorescent protein (RFP). The GFP expressing cells were mixed with equal number cells expressing full-length PTPρ (co-expressing RFP) and the aggregation assays were performed. As shown in Fig 3A, the GFP labeled cells did not aggregate and did not contribute to the aggregates formed by cells expressing full-length PTPρ (RFP). These results strongly suggest that the aggregation of Sf9 cells expressing PTPρ is mediated through a homophilic interaction among PTPρ molecules in trans, but not through a heterophilic interaction between molecules expressed on the surface of Sf9 cells. Interestingly, the homophilic interaction of PTPρ is very specific. Although 63% of the amino acid sequences of the extracellular domain of PTPρ are identical with that of PTPRM (PTPμ), Sf9 cells expressing PTPρ (co-expressing RFP) did not aggregate with PTPμ expressing cells (co-expressing GFP) as shown in Fig. 3B.  Figure 3 Figure 3 PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation The tumor-derived PTPRT/PTPρ mutations in the MAM and Ig domains are defective in cell-cell aggregation  Several studies demonstrated that the MAM and Ig domains as well as the first two FNIII repeats of PTPμ are the minimal essential regions required for its homophilic interaction (13, 15, 17, 18). We identified 5 tumor-specific mutations that are located in the two domains (2). Among these five mutations, the F74S mutation is located in the MAM domain and the other four mutations (A209T, K218T, F248S and Y280H) are located in the Ig domain (Fig. 4A). To test whether these mutations affect their ability to mediate cell-cell aggregation in Sf9 cells, we engineered the five mutations by site-directed mutagenesis using the full-length PTPρ baculoviral construct as the template. The five mutant proteins are expressed at the expected size and at similar levels to wild-type PTPρ on a western blot (Fig. 4B), indicating that these mutations do not affect their protein stability. None of these mutations significantly alter their cell surface expression, as all five mutant PTPρ proteins showed strong plasma membrane staining (Fig. 4C and Fig. 7). However, as shown in Fig. 5, all mutant PTPρ proteins formed smaller aggregates than that of the wild-type PTPρ protein. To quantify the cells aggregates, percentage of cells that are incorporate into > 5-cell clusters were counted (as described in the material and methods section). As shown in Fig. 5, Sf9 cells expressing all the mutants formed significantly less aggregates than that of cells expressing wild-type PTPρ. The deletion construct of PTPρ lacking the two phosphatase domains (PTPρ Extra-JMD-W) and the K218T mutant exhibited similar levels of aggregation that were statistically less than wild-type PTPρ (p < 0.01). Taken together, our data demonstrated that the five tumor-derived mutations located the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ are deficient in cell-cell adhesion. Therefore, these mutations exhibit varying degrees of loss-of-function in cell adhesion.  Figure 4 Figure 4 Expression of tumor-derived PTPρ mutants in Sf9 cells Figure 5 Figure 5 Tumor-derived mutations of PTPρ are defective in cell-cell aggregation Mechanistically, the defect of the PTPρ mutations in cell-cell adhesion could be resulted from either impaired ability in homophilic binding or reduced cell surface expression. Although immunofluorescent staining indicated that those mutations do not alter cell surface expression qualitatively, it is imperative to quantify cell surface expression of mutant PTPρ proteins. As described in detail in the method section, baculovirus-infected Sf9 cell surface proteins were labeled with Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin and isolated on immobilized NeutrAvidin Gel. Western blots were performed with antibodies to PTPμ (SK18) or the V5 tag. The SK18 antibody recognizes the cytoplasmic domain of both PTPμ and PTPρ. The results shown in Fig. 7 demonstrate that full length PTPμ and the wild-type, mutant and deleted PTPρ proteins were expressed at the cell surface. As a control for a non-cell surface protein, the cytoplasmic intracellular domain of PTPμ (PTPμ-intra) was expressed that is detected by SK18 (9). PTPμ intra does not contain an extracellular domain and therefore is not biotinylated nor precipitated by the NeutrAvidin gel (Fig. 7). Quantitatively, the levels of cell surface expression of the 5 tumor-derived PTPρ mutations were similar to that of wild-type protein. If the cell surface expression level (CSE value) of wild-type PTPρ is arbitrarily assigned as 1, the CSE values of F74S, A209T, K218T, F248S and Y280H mutations were 2.3, 1.1, 1.6, 0.6 and 0.8 respectively. Interestingly, some PTPρ mutants that contain the extracellular domain but are unable to mediate cell-cell aggregation are expressed at higher levels on the Sf9 cell surface than wild-type PTPρ. These results suggest that defect of PTPρ mutation in cell-cell adhesion is mainly due to reduced homophilic binding affinity of the mutant proteins. Interestingly, the cell surface expression levels PTPρ Extra-TM (CSE value = 27) and PTPρ Extra-JMD-W (CSE value = 20) were much higher than that of full-length protein for unknown reasons.  Go to: Discussion We demonstrated that PTPRT/PTPρ meditates homophilic cell-cell aggregation and five tumor-derived mutations located in the MAM and Ig domains impair this function. Our results strongly suggest that those PTPρ loss-of-function mutations are selected for during the process of tumor development; therefore, these mutations should play a causal role in tumorigenesis. We chose to examine whether the MAM and Ig domain mutations are deficient in cell aggregation, because previous studies indicated that these two domains of PTPμ, a close homolog of PTPρ, are required for its cell-cell aggregation function (13, 15, 17). Recently, the crystal structure of the N-terminal MAM and Ig domains of PTPμ was determined at 2.7 Å resolution (17, 18). Five tumor-derived mutations of PTPρ are located in the two domains and all of them can be mapped to equivalent residues in the MAM and Ig domain structure of PTPμ. Based on the crystal structure, the authors predicted that 4 of them (F74S, A209T, F248S and Y280H) would cause significant perturbation of the structure of PTPRT, because these mutations dramatically alter the character of buried side-chains (17). Moreover, the fifth mutation K218T is located on the surface of the Ig domain and the authors predicted that this mutation would directly alter protein-protein interactions (17). Our data indicated that the K218T mutation affects the size of aggregates and only a small effect on the percentage of cells incorporated into the aggregates, suggesting that the K218T mutant may decrease the binding affinity of PTPρ. Interestingly, the other four mutations significantly reduce the percentage of aggregation, therefore, these data suggest that the F74S, A209T, F248S and Y280H mutations dramatically alter the domain structure and lead to perturbation of the homophilic interaction of PTPρ. Our previous studies showed that the tumor-derived phosphatase domain mutations of PTPρ diminish its phosphatase activity and overexpression of PTPρ suppresses the growth of colorectal cancer cells, indicating that PTPρ normally act as a tumor suppressor (2). The loss-of-function nature of these five extracellular mutations provides further supportive evidence to this notion.  The finding that PTPρ mediates homophilic cell aggregation of non-adhesive insect Sf9 cells suggests that this protein could be involved in cell-cell adhesion in human epithelial cells where it is endogenously expressed. The type IIB RPTP subfamily consists of PTPμ, PTPκ, PTPρ and PCP-2. It has been shown that PTPμ, PTPκ and PTPλ (PCP-2), mediate homophilic cell-cell adhesion (9–12). Interestingly, the homophilic interaction of these RPTPs seems to be highly specific, because we and others showed that neither PTPρ nor PTPκ (15) interact with PTPμ. It is worth noting that the juxtamembrane domain of PTPρ may be necessary for its cell adhesion function. As shown in Figure 2, Sf9 cells expressing the extracellular and juxtamembrane domains of PTPρ, but not cells expressing the extracellular and transmembrane portion of the protein (PTPρ Extra-TM), formed cell aggregates, although both proteins were expressed on the cell surface (Fig. 7). Expression of a construct encoding the extracellular, transmembrane and only 55 amino acids of the juxtamembrane domain of PTPμ in non-adhesive Sf9 insect cells induced cell aggregation (9). It is possible that cis interactions between the membrane proximal juxtamembrane domains are required for initiating, stabilizing or maintaining cell-cell adhesion. Interestingly, there are two PTPRT mutations (K788E and R790I) located in the juxtamembrane domain that are found in lung cancers (1). Moreover, Besco et al. showed that PTPρ interacts with cell adhesion molecules including E-cadherin, α, β, and γ-catenin, and α;-actinin (19). PTPμ also binds the cadherin-catenin complex (7, 20–22). Loss of cell-cell adhesion, such as genetic and epigenetic inactivation of cell adhesion molecule E-cadherin, is thought to be a prerequisite for carcinoma invasion and metastasis (23). Therefore, mutational inactivation of the cell adhesion function PTPρ may also play a critical role in tumor migration and metastasis.
55||The receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase T (PTPRT/PTPρ) is the most frequently mutated tyrosine phosphatase in human cancer. PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation. In its extracellular region, PTPρ has cell adhesion molecule-like motifs, including a MAM domain, an immunoglobulin domain and four fibronectin type III (FNIII) repeats. Tumor-derived mutations have been identified in all of these extracellular domains. Previously, we determined that tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and immunoglobulin domains of PTPρ reduce homophilic cell-cell aggregation. In this manuscript, we describe experiments in which we evaluated the contribution of the FNIII repeats to PTPρ-mediated cell-cell adhesion. Our results demonstrate that deletion of the FNIII repeats of PTPρ result in defective cell-cell aggregation. Furthermore, all of the tumor-derived mutations in the FNIII repeats of PTPρ also disrupt cell-cell aggregation. These results further support the hypothesis that mutational inactivation of PTPρ may lead to cancer progression by disrupting cell-cell adhesion.  Keywords: Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase, PTPRT, PTPρ, fibronectin type III repeat, cell-cell aggregation, cell-cell adhesion Go to: 1. Introduction Cancer progression and metastasis is in part influenced by changes in cell adhesion and tyrosine phosphorylation mediated by cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) (Paschos et al. 2009; Wheelock et al. 2008), as well as tyrosine kinases and tyrosine phosphatases, respectively (Freiss and Vignon 2004; Ostman et al. 2006). Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatases (RPTPs) comprise a family of proteins that have extracellular CAM domains coupled to cytoplasmic tyrosine phosphatase domains, and thus can impact cancer progression by regulating both cell adhesion and tyrosine phosphorylation (Brady-Kalnay 2001; Ostman et al. 2006).  The type IIB PTPμ-like subfamily of RPTPs includes PTPμ, PTPρ, PTPκ, and PCP-2 (PTPλ) (Aricescu et al. 2008; Brady-Kalnay 2001). The extracellular segment of the PTPμ-like RPTPs contain motifs found in CAMs, including a MAM domain, an immunoglobulin (Ig) domain and four fibronectin type III (FNIII) repeats (Aricescu et al. 2008; Brady-Kalnay 2001; Ostman et al. 2006). PTPμ subfamily members bind homophilically (i.e. the “ligand” for PTPμ is an identical PTPμ molecule on an adjacent cell) (Brady-Kalnay et al. 1993; Cheng et al. 1997; Gebbink et al. 1993; Sap et al. 1994; Yu et al. 2008; Zondag et al. 1995). The Ig domain of PTPμ is responsible for promoting homophilic interactions (Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994), and proper cell surface localization (Del Vecchio and Tonks 2005). However, both the MAM and Ig domains as well as the first two FNIII repeats are required for efficient cell-cell adhesion of PTPμ (Aricescu et al. 2006; Aricescu et al. 2007; Aricescu et al. 2008; Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Cismasiu et al. 2004; Zondag et al. 1995). PTPρ and PTPκ also mediate homophilic cell-cell adhesion (Sap et al. 1994; Yu et al. 2008). However, PCP2 has not yet been demonstrated to mediate cell-cell adhesion or aggregation although in vitro binding studies indicate it can bind homophilically (Cheng et al. 1997).  All type IIB RPTPs are potential tumor suppressor genes (Burgoyne et al. 2009a; Flavell et al. 2008; McArdle et al. 2001; Yan et al. 2006). Notably, PTPρ is the most frequently mutated phosphatase gene in human cancers including colon, lung, skin and stomach cancers (Forbes et al. 2008; Wang et al. 2004). Defective adhesion mediated by PTPρ may be at least one mechanism of cancer progression. In fact, cancer derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ are defective in mediating cell-cell aggregation (Yu et al. 2008).  In addition to the tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ previously described (Wang et al. 2004; Yu et al. 2008), the majority of extracellular domain mutations are located in the FNIII repeats of PTPρ (Wang et al. 2004). Given the importance of FNIII repeats in PTPμ-mediated adhesion and aggregation (Aricescu et al. 2007), we tested the contribution of the FNIII repeats of PTPρ to PTPρ-mediated adhesion. We determined that deletion constructs where each of the extracellular domains of PTPρ is removed, including the FNIII repeats, are defective in mediating cell-cell aggregation of Sf9 cells. Furthermore, when we engineered the cancer-derived mutations in the FNIII repeats of these PTPρ mutant proteins, they also result in defective cell-cell aggregation. These results demonstrate the importance of the FNIII repeats in contributing to proper cell-cell adhesion and suggest that adhesion mediated by PTPρ is likely important for the tumor suppressor activity of PTPρ.  Go to: 2. Materials and methods 2.1 Baculovirus generation  Baculoviruses were generated by transfecting cells with the BaculoGold™ Linearized Baculovirus DNA (BD Biosciences, San Diego, CA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The baculovirus for wild-type PTPρ was previously described (Yu et al. 2008).  2.2 Sf9 cell culture  Insect Sf9 cells from (BD Biosciences) were maintained at 27°C in Graces Insect Medium (BD Biosciences). The medium was supplemented with 10% FBS from (Hyclone, Logan, UT) and Gentamicin (MP Biomedicals, Solon, OH). Viruses were added to Sf9 cell medium to induce the expression of proteins of interest. Cells were harvested 30 hours post-infection for further analysis.  2.3 Generation of PTPRT deletion constructs  The PTPρ-ΔMAM, PTPρ-ΔIg, PTPρ-ΔFNIII-1, PTPρ-ΔFNIII-2, PTPρ-ΔFNIII-3 and PTPρ-ΔFNIII-4 constructs were generated by fusion PCR using the full-length PTPRT pVL1393-V5-His vector as the template. The primers 5’-GAAGATCTATGGCGAGCCTCGCCGCG-3’ and 5’-CCGGAATTCGGATCCTGGGGCGCTCTGAGCCCGGG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔMAM construct; the primers 5’-GCGTGGGAGGCTCTCTGCATGGATGAGCAAGGAC-3’ and 5’-CAATGGGTCTTGCTCATCCATGCAGAGAGCCTCCCACGCCCATTG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔIg construct; the primers 5’-CTGCACACTTGGTCCTGGTTTTCACGATCAGCTCCGCGTA-3’ and 5’-TACGCGGAGCGTCGTGAAAACCAGGACCAAGTGTGCAG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-1 construct; the primers 5’-CCGCCAGGGCCTCCCCTCACCGAGGAAGACGTTCCAGGAG-3’ and 5’-CTCCTGGAACGTCTTCCTCGGTGAGGGGAGGCCCTGGCGG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-2 construct; the primers 5’-GAGGAGCTGGTGGTGCAGACTAAAATTTCAGCTCCATCCA-3’ and 5’-TGGATGGAGCTGAAATTTTAGTCTGCACCACCAGCTCCTC-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-3 construct and the 5’-GTCACCACTCGGATTGCCACCGGTGCCTCCACCCAGAATT-3’ and 5’-AATTCTGGGTGGAGGCACCGGTGGCAATCCGAGTGGTGAC-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-4 construct.  2.4 Immunoblotting  Sf9 cells were lysed in a standard lysis buffer (20 mM Tris·HCl, pH 7.5, 1% Triton X-100, 150 mM sodium chloride, 2 mM Benzamidine, 2.5μg/ml Aprotinin, 2.5μg/ml Leupeptin, and 0.5μg/ml Pepstatin). Samples were solubilized in 2X SDS loading buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE. Samples were transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (Whatman, Piscataway, NJ) and immunoblotted with SK18 (Brady-Kalnay et al. 1993), which cross-reacts with PTPρ.  2.5 Cell surface expression of PTPρ  Cell surface expression of PTPρ protein in baculovirus infected Sf9 cells was determined using a modified biotin-avidin reaction with the Cell Surface Protein Isolation Kit (catalog# 89991, Pierce, Rockford, IL), as previously described (Yu et al. 2008). Briefly, Sf9 cell media was removed and the flasks were incubated with rocking for 30 minutes at 4°C in 5ml of 0.25mg/ml Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin in 1X PBS. The cells were mechanically removed from the flask, centrifuged, washed, and lysed according to the manufacturer’s protocols. To isolate cell surface expressed PTPρ the cell lysate was added to a NeutrAvidin Gel column and incubated for 60 min at room temperature (RT) with rocking prior to washing and eluting proteins with 200μl of sample buffer containing a final concentration of 55mM DTT for 60min at RT. The flow through was run on 6% SDS-PAGE gels and transferred to nitrocellulose. Total cell surface protein levels were normalized by immunoblotting cell lysates with an anti-actin antibody (JLA20). The normalized cell surface protein was run on 6% SDS-PAGE gels, transferred to nitrocellulose and immunoblotted with antibodies to PTPμ that also recognized PTPρ (SK18) followed by secondary antibody conjugated to HRP. The HRP signal was detected using a Fluor-S MAX MultiImager (Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc., Hercules, CA).  2.6 Aggregation Assays  Sf9 cells were harvested by trituration. The cell suspensions were added to glass scintillation vials and incubated at 27°C at 90 rpm in a gyratory shaker for 30 minutes. For a given condition, the cell suspension was transferred to a 100mm petri dish either prior to (0 time point) or 30 minutes after aggregation. Images were captured at 10X magnification with a Nikon TE-200 inverted fluorescent microscope (Tokyo, Japan). To quantify cell aggregates, pictures of four randomly selected fields were taken per dish. The area of each object (single cells and aggregates) was determined by the Metamorph software (Molecular Devices) using an auto-threshold setting for light objects and appropriate size filters that allowed the counting of cells and aggregates but not debris. The four replicates were combined to yield average readings per condition. The percent aggregation was then calculated as the average aggregate area at 30 minutes minus the average aggregate area at zero minutes divided by the average aggregate area at 30 minutes [(N30-N0)/N30]. A minimum of three independent experiments was performed per condition. Statistical significance was determined in Microsoft Excel using Student’s T-test. Error bars indicate standard error.  2.7 Site-directed mutagenesis  The I395V, Y412F, R453C, Q479E, S492F, N510K, T605M, V648G, A707T, and L708P tumor-derived mutations (Wang et al. 2004) were generated by fusion PCR using the full-length PTPRT pVL1393-V5-His vector as the template. The primers 5’-TGGCCCACAGAACGTGGAAGTCGTAGACATCAGAGCC-3’ and 5’-CTTCCACGTTCTGTGGGCCA-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the I395V mutant; the primers 5’-CAGTGGGAGCCCTTCGGCTTCGCGGTGACCCGCTGCCAT-3’ and 5’-AAGCCGAAGGGCTCCCACTG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the Y412F mutant; the primers 5’-CTACACCCTGCGAGGCCTGTGCCCCTTCATGACCATCCG-3’ and 5’-ACAGGCCTCGCAGGGTGTAG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the R453C mutant; the primers 5’-GAGCGAGGAGCTGGTGGTGGAGACTGAGGAAGACGTTCC-3’ and 5’-CCACCACCAGCTCCTCGCTC-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the Q479E mutant; the primers 5’-TGTTCCTCTAGAATTCATCCAAGGGGGGCCCT TT-3’ and 5’-ATGAATTCTAGAGGAACA-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the S492F mutant; the primers 5’-TCCAGTGGAAACCTCCCAAGGAGACCAATGGGGTCATCA-3’ and 5’-CTTGGGAGGTTTCCACTGGA-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the N510K mutant; the primers 5’-CCATTGAATGAGACAGACATGACC ATCACAGTGATGCTG3-’ and 5’-ATGTCTGTCTCATTCAATGG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the T605M mutant; the primers 5’-ATTATTGAGTGCTTTTC GGGGCCCGTGAGCTATCGGAAT-3’ and 5’-CCCGAAAAGCACTCAATAAT-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the V648G mutant; the primers 5’-CTACAGCATCTACTTCCAGACACTCAGCAAAGCCAATGG-3’ and 5’-TCTGGAAGTAGATGCTGTAG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the A707T mutant; the primers 5’-AGCATCTACTTCCAGGCACCCAGCAAAGCCAATGGAGAG-3’ and 5’-GGTGCCTGGAAGTAGATGCT-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the L708P mutant.  2.8 Mapping of PTPρ mutations onto the PTPμ crystal structure  The sequence of PTPμ and PTPρ were aligned using CLUSTALW. Mutations probed in this study were mapped using this sequence alignment onto the PTPμ structure (PDB ID: 2V5Y). The figure was prepared utilizing PyMOL 1.2r1 (http://pymol.org).  Go to: 3. Results 3.1 Deletions in the MAM, Ig, and FNIII repeat domains of PTPρ result in defective cell-cell aggregation  To test whether a protein mediates cell-cell aggregation or adhesion, one has to express the protein of interest in the non-adhesive cells. Otherwise, one cannot measure the aggregation or adhesion of a single molecule in the sea of other adhesion molecules naturally expressed in adhesive cells. This is the main reason that the non-adhesive Sf9 or Drosophila S2 cells are widely used models for such studies. To our knowledge, nearly all cell lines of epithelial origin are adhesive cells and thus are not suitable for these studies. Introduction of putative adhesion molecules into non-adhesive Drosophila S2 insect cells has been used to demonstrate adhesive functions for fasciclin II, connectin, Dtrk, ARK, Neuroglian, and Capricious molecules directly (Bellosta et al. 1995; Hortsch et al. 1995; Nose et al. 1992; Pulido et al. 1992; Shinza-Kameda et al. 2006; Snow et al. 1989). In a similar approach, we and others demonstrated that the full-length form of PTPμ induced aggregation, via a homophilic binding mechanism, when expressed in nonadhesive Sf9 insect cells, which are derived from the Fall army-worm Spodoptera frugiperda (Brady-Kalnay et al. 1993; Gebbink et al. 1993; Zondag et al. 1995). We have also used this system for analyzing PTPRT/PTP rho (Yu et al., 2008). Examples of other cell adhesion molecules that have been studied in Sf9 cells include L1 (Gouveia et al. 2008), Galectin-3 (Inohara and Raz 1995) and C-CAM1 (Phan et al. 2001). Insect S2 and Sf9 cells are extremely useful systems to analyze adhesive mechanisms of cell adhesion molecules.  The MAM domain, Ig domain, and first two-FNIII repeats are essential for PTPμ cell-cell aggregation (Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Zondag et al. 1995). To test whether these domains are the minimal essential regions required for PTPρ cell-cell aggregation, baculoviral PTPρ deletion constructs of the MAM domain, Ig domain, and each of the four individual FNIII repeats were made and expressed in non-adhesive Sf9 insect cells (Figure 1). All the PTPρ deletion constructs were expressed and appropriately trafficked to the cell surface (Figure 1). To test whether these domains contribute to PTPρ-dependent adhesion, Sf9 cells were evaluated for their ability to mediate cell-cell aggregation when expressing the deletion constructs. Aggregation assays with Sf9 cells expressing the deletion constructs were conducted alongside aggregation assays using Sf9 cells expressing wild-type PTPρ, which mediates cell-cell aggregation (Figure 2) and serves as a positive control (Yu et al. 2008). Deletion of any of the extracellular domains of PTPρ resulted in defective cell-cell aggregation compared to aggregation of wild-type PTPρ expressing Sf9 cells (Figure 2). Deletion of the fourth FNIII repeat was the least severe where ~23% aggregation was observed. Deletion of the MAM domain, Ig domain and FNIII repeats 1, 2 or 3 resulted in 5–16% aggregation. When the level of aggregation was quantified, we determined that all of the deletion constructs resulted in a large and statistically significant reduction in cell-cell aggregation (Figure 2, p-value<0.005). Together with our previous study, these results demonstrate that all of the extracellular domains of PTPρ are necessary for PTPρ-mediated cell-cell aggregation.  Figure 1 Figure 1 PTPρ deletion constructs are all expressed at the cell surface. Constructs containing deletions of one extracellular domain of PTPρ each were generated and expressed in Sf9 cells. Total cellular protein and cell surface protein were isolated ... Figure 2 Figure 2 Deletion of any of the extracellular domains of PTPρ disrupts cell-cell aggregation. Sf9 cells expressing deletion constructs of the individual extracellular domains of PTPρ were allowed to aggregate for 30 minutes prior to imaging. Scale ... 3.2 Tumor-Derived PTPρ Mutations in the FNIII repeats result in defective cell-cell aggregation  We next tested the effects of human tumor-derived mutations in the FNIII repeats of PTPρ on PTPρ-mediated cell-cell aggregation. We recently demonstrated that tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ are defective in cell-cell aggregation using the Sf9 aggregation assay (Yu et al. 2008), and given the above results, we hypothesized that mutations in the FNIII domains would likewise result in defective aggregation. Ten human tumor-derived mutations are located in the second, third and fourth FNIII repeats of PTPρ (Wang et al. 2004). To test whether these mutations also affect cell-cell aggregation, we engineered the ten human mutations by site-directed mutagenesis using the full-length PTPρ baculoviral construct as a template (see Figure 3). The ten mutations are expressed in Sf9 cells at the expected molecular weight and at similar levels to full-length human PTPρ (Figure 3). All of these mutants are expressed at the cell surface (Figure 3). When these mutant PTPρ proteins were expressed in Sf9 cells and tested in aggregation assays, we observed that all of the mutant PTPρ proteins resulted in fewer and smaller aggregates than wild type PTPρ (Figure 4). When the level of aggregation was quantified, we determined that all of the FNIII mutations significantly reduced cell-cell aggregation (16–43%) compared to cells expressing wild type PTPρ (68% aggregation, p-value<0.008, Figure 4).  Figure 3 Figure 3 PTPρ proteins containing tumor-derived mutations in their FNIII domains are expressed at the cell surface. Ten mutations in the FNIII domains of PTPρ were generated by site-directed mutagenesis and expressed in Sf9 cells. Total cellular ... Figure 4 Figure 4 Tumor derived mutations in FNIII domains of PTPρ are defective in cell-cell aggregation. Sf9 cells expressing the mutated PTPρ proteins were allowed to aggregate for 30 minutes prior to imaging. Scale bar equals 100μm. The percentage ... Go to: 4. Discussion PTPRT/PTPρ is the most highly mutated tyrosine phosphatase in human colon carcinomas. We and others found that PTPRT/ PTPρ is also mutated in lung, gastric and skin (melanoma) cancers (Forbes et al. 2008; Wang et al. 2004). The spectrum of mutations, which included nonsense mutations and frameshifts, suggested that these mutations were inactivating (Wang et al. 2004). Biochemical analyses demonstrated that missense mutations in the catalytic domains of PTPRT diminished its phosphatase activity and overexpression of PTPRT inhibited colon cancer cell growth. Moreover, we showed previously that the tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ are defective in cell-cell adhesion (Yu et al. 2008). All these data suggest that PTPRT/PTPρ normally functions as a tumor suppressor gene. The experiments presented in this manuscript evaluate the contribution of the individual extracellular domains of PTPρ to PTPρ-mediated adhesion. We demonstrate that in addition to the MAM and Ig domains, the FNIII repeats are required for PTPρ-mediated adhesion. Importantly, we also show that PTPρ-mediated adhesion is impaired by human tumor-derived mutations in those FNIII repeats. These studies indicate that all the tumor-derived mutations located in the extracellular domain of PTPRT are loss-of-function mutations, thereby providing further evidence that PTPRT is a tumor suppressor. This notion is further supported by our recent study showing that PTPRT knockout mice are highly susceptible to colon specific carcinogen azoxymethane (AOM)-induced colon cancer (Zhao et al.).  PTPμ-mediated cell-cell aggregation requires the MAM domain, Ig domain, and the first two FNIII repeats (Aricescu et al. 2006; Aricescu et al. 2007; Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Cismasiu et al. 2004; Zondag et al. 1995). The entire extracellular domain of PTPμ is predicted to make a rigid conformation with extensive interfaces between each of the domains (Aricescu et al. 2006). The minimal adhesive unit for functional cell-cell aggregation is the MAM domain, Ig domain and the first two FNIII repeats (Aricescu et al. 2006; Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Zondag et al. 1995). However, the FNIII repeats appear to play a role in spacing the key homophilic interaction domain(s) a certain distance from the plasma membrane. Deletion of the FNIII repeats changed the intercellular spacing of two apposing membranes (Aricescu et al. 2007). Cell-cell aggregation assays of the FNIII deletion constructs were not performed in that study (Aricescu et al. 2007). The amino acid residues of the interfaces between the extracellular domains are highly conserved between members of the type IIB RPTP subfamily (Aricescu et al. 2006; Aricescu et al. 2007) therefore it is likely that the PTPρ adhesive interface resembles that of PTPμ. Together our data support the hypothesis that the essential regions for PTPρ-mediated adhesion resemble those of PTPμ.  To gain insight into how the point mutations may alter the adhesive function of PTPρ, we modeled the human tumor derived PTPρ mutations onto the crystal structure of PTPμ (Figure 5). The crystal structure of PTPμ includes only the first three FNIII repeats (Aricescu et al. 2007). Four of these mutations fall within the second FNIII (FNIII-2) repeat (I395V, Y412F, R453C, Q479E). It is important to note that FNIII-2 is required for efficient cell-cell adhesion (Aricescu et al. 2006). Two of the mutations fall in the third FNIII (FNIII-3) repeat (S492F, N510K). The mutation within the linker region between FNIII-1 and FNII-2 (Y412F) could alter the flexibility or positioning between the two domains. The other mutations (I395V R453C, Q479E, S492F, N510K) appear to be clustered in surface exposed regions and/or near the linker regions between FNIII-2 and FNIII-3 that could alter flexibility, position of individual FNIII repeats and/or protein-protein interactions. While these mutations do not correspond to the adhesive interface hypothesized for PTPμ based upon a single static crystal structure (Aricescu et al. 2007), some of the mutations fall within the FNIII-2 repeat which is required for adhesion, and all of these surface modifications would likely alter either the three-dimensional topology and/or cis/trans interactions of PTPρ.  Figure 5 Figure 5 Structural modeling of the point mutations of PTPρ. The point mutations (indicated in red) evaluated in this manuscript were modeled onto the equivalent sites in the crystal structure of PTPμ. The PTPρ mutations likely alter cell-cell ... Other type IIB RPTPs also function as tumor suppressor genes, by regulating adhesion and/or tyrosine phosphorylation of effector proteins. Expression of PTPμ is reduced in human glioblastomas (GBM) and cell lines (Burgoyne et al. 2009a). Reduction in full-length PTPμ expression with a concomitant increase in a proteolytically processed cytoplasmic fragment of PTPμ is observed in GBM cells and both are correlated with decreased adhesion and increased migration observed in the disease (Burgoyne et al. 2009a; Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Over-expression of the full-length form of PTPμ suppressed migration of GBM cells and reduces their survival (Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Of note, at the same time that stable cell adhesion is reduced due to the loss of full-length PTPμ expression in GBM cells, a catalytically active cytoplasmic fragment of PTPμ is released and translocates to the nucleus (Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Catalytic activity of this fragment is also necessary for cell migration and viability of GBM cells (Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Therefore, both the tyrosine phosphatase activity of the cytoplasmic fragment of PTPμ and the loss of PTPμ-mediated adhesion may contribute to the invasiveness of GBM cells.  PTPκ is also implicated in tumor progression. PTPκ expression is reduced in melanoma cell lines and human tissue biopsies (McArdle et al. 2001), and in Hodgkin’s lymphoma cells (Flavell et al. 2008). Over-expression of PTPκ in Hodgkin lymphoma cells reduces cellular proliferation and survival (Flavell et al. 2008). Like PTPμ, PTPκ is proteolytically processed (Anders et al. 2006), potentially as a result of aberrant glycosylation (Kim et al. 2006). It is not clear whether adhesion or catalytic activity of PTPκ is required for its tumor suppressor activity (Flavell et al. 2008; Kim et al. 2006). Of note, the cleaved cytoplasmic domain fragment of PTPκ is catalytically active, translocates to the nucleus and promotes β-catenin-mediated transcription (Anders et al. 2006). Signaling via the PTPκ cytoplasmic fragment might augment the loss of stable cell-cell adhesion and may promote tumor progression.  Although speculative, it is interesting to postulate that tyrosine phosphatase activity and or cleavage of PTPρ will also be an important element of its tumor suppressor activity, as has been demonstrated for PTPμ and PTPκ. Interestingly, we identified and validated STAT3 as a direct substrate of PTPRT (Zhang et al. 2007). STAT3 is latent transcription factor that translocates from the cytoplasm to the nucleus after being phosphorylated at the Y705 residue. It is possible that the cleaved intracellular fragment of PTPρ, which contains the phosphatase domains, translocates to nucleus and dephosphorylates STAT3. Besco and colleagues found that PTPRT associates with the adhesion molecule E-cadherin and its binding partner p120 catenin, which are PTPRT substrates (Besco et al. 2006). p120 also translocates to the nucleus and associates with the Kaiso transcription factor (Daniel and Reynolds 1999). Given the frequency and distribution of mutations in PTPRT/PTPρ in human colon and other cancers, a more thorough understanding of its biological function is warranted.
56||T-cell large granular lymphocytic (T-LGL) leukemia is a clonal disease characterized by the expansion of mature CD3+CD8+ cytotoxic T cells. It is often associated with autoimmune disorders and immune-mediated cytopenias. Our recent findings suggest that up to 40% of T-LGL patients harbor mutations in the STAT3 gene, whereas STAT5 mutations are present in 2% of patients. In order to identify putative disease-causing genetic alterations in the remaining T-LGL patients, we performed exome sequencing from three STAT mutation-negative patients and validated the findings in 113 large granular lymphocytic (LGL) leukemia patients. On average, 11 CD8+ LGL leukemia cell-specific high-confidence nonsynonymous somatic mutations were discovered in each patient. Interestingly, all patients had at least one mutation that affects either directly the STAT3-pathway (such as PTPRT) or T-cell activation (BCL11B, SLIT2 and NRP1). In all three patients, the STAT3 pathway was activated when studied by RNA expression or pSTAT3 analysis. Screening of the remaining 113 LGL leukemia patients did not reveal additional patients with same mutations. These novel mutations are potentially biologically relevant and represent rare genetic triggers for T-LGL leukemia, and are associated with similar disease phenotype as observed in patients with mutations in the STAT3 gene.  Keywords: LGL-leukemia, cytotoxic T-cells, STAT3, PTPRT Go to: Introduction Large granular lymphocytic (LGL) leukemia was first described in 1985 as a clonal disorder involving tissue invasion of the bone marrow, spleen and liver.1 Patients are prone to recurrent infections and often suffer from neutropenia, anemia, splenomegaly and autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and systemic lupus.2 LGL leukemia can be divided into T-cell and natural killer (NK)-cell LGL leukemia depending upon the type of cell that is affected. T-cell LGL (T-LGL) leukemia is characterized as a chronic leukemia where there is an expansion of CD3+ CD8+ cytotoxic T cells.  The prevalence of LGL leukemia has not yet been accurately established and it could be underdiagnosed, but it has been estimated to range from 2 to 5% of all chronic lymphoproliferative diseases in North America.3 In Western countries, LGL leukemia arising from T-cells is much more frequent (85%) than NK-cell disease (15%). T-LGL leukemia is diagnosed at a median age of 55–60 years and has an equal gender distribution. Only 20–25% of patients are younger than 50 years.3  Our recent findings suggest that up to 40% of T-LGL patients harbor mutations in the STAT3 gene,4, 5 whereas a smaller subset of patients present with mutations in the STAT5B gene.6 Although these findings emphasize the role of STAT family genes in the pathogenesis of LGL leukemia, the underlying genetic defects in the remaining T-LGL patients are yet to be discovered. In order to identify additional somatic mutations, we chose three STAT3 and STAT5 mutation-negative T-LGL leukemia patients for exome sequencing.  Go to: Materials and methods Study patients  The study was undertaken in compliance with the principles of the Helsinki declaration and was approved by the ethics committees in the Helsinki University Central Hospital (Helsinki, Finland), the Cleveland Clinic (Cleveland, Ohio) and the Penn State Hershey Cancer Institute (Hershey, Pennsylvania). All patients and healthy controls gave written informed consents.  The patient cohort consisted of 116 LGL-leukemia patients who were confirmed to be STAT3 and STAT5 mutation negative by exome sequencing or amplicon sequencing. The three patients selected for exome sequencing were untreated patients who were newly diagnosed at our unit, and therefore fresh blood samples were available for sorting of CD8+ tumor and CD4+ control cells. The majority of the remaining cohort (n=113) consisted of archived DNA samples or frozen cells. In total, the cohort consisted of 92 T-LGL leukemia and 24 NK-LGL leukemia cases. Forty-six samples were from the Penn State Hershey Cancer Institute, sixty-one from the Cleveland Clinic and nine from Finland. All patients met the criteria of LGL leukemia as defined by the World Health Organization in 2008.  Sample preparation  Mononuclear cells were separated from all patient samples with Ficoll-Paque PLUS (GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, UK). Patient samples sent for exome sequencing were further labeled with CD4 and CD8 magnetic MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotech, San Diego, CA, USA) and separated with an AutoMACS magnetic cell sorter (Miltenyi Biotech). A small amount of the CD8+ and CD4+ cells were used to analyze and confirm the purity of the sorted fractions with flow cytometry (FACSAria, Becton Dickinson, San Jose, CA, USA).  DNA and RNA extraction  DNA was extracted from fresh or frozen mononuclear cell, CD8+ and CD4+ fractions with the Nucleospin Tissue Kit (Macherey-Nagel, Düren, Germany). RNA extraction from CD8+ and CD4+ fractions was performed using miRNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen, Venio, The Netherlands). DNA and RNA concentrations were measured using Qubit 2.0 Fluorometer (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and NanoDrop 2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, DE, USA), whereas the quality was assessed using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA).  Vβ analysis  Peripheral blood samples from the three exome-sequenced T-LGL patients were used to determine the T-cell receptor (TCR) Vβ repertoire of human T lymphocytes with the IO Test Beta Mark TCR Vβ Repertoire Kit (Beckman-Coulter Immunotech, Marseille, France). The kit contains mixtures of conjugated TCR Vβ antibodies corresponding to 24 different specificities, covering about 70% of the normal human TCR Vβ repertoire. To focus on specific blood cells, the antibodies in the kit were used together with CD3+, CD4+ and CD8+ antibodies. The samples were analyzed by flow cytometry (FACSAria, Becton Dickinson) in order to detect aberrant clonal expansion.  Exome sequencing  CD8+ T cells and matched CD4+ T cells from three STAT-negative T-LGL patients were used as tumor and control samples for exome sequencing. As described previously,4 the exome was captured with the Nimblegen SeqCap EZ Exome Library v2.0 (Nimblegen, Basel, Switzerland) and the sequencing was performed with the Illumina HiSeq2000 sequencing platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). Candidate somatic mutations were identified with a bioinformatics pipeline consisting of Burrows-Wheeler Aligner for sequence alignment,7 Samtools for alignment filtering,8 Varscan2 for somatic mutation calling9 and Annovar for functional consequence prediction10 as described previously.4  Validation and screening of candidate somatic mutations by capillary sequencing  The candidate mutations were validated and screened by capillary sequencing in 113 STAT-mutation-negative patients. Primers were designed using Primer-Blast (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/tools/primer-blast/, National Center for Biotechnology Information). Capillary PCR products were either separated by gel electrophoresis and extracted from the gel using the QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen) or purified using ExoSAP-IT (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The purified PCR products were sequenced with BigDye v.1.1 Cycle Sequencing kit and ABI PRISM 3730xl DNA Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Sequences were analyzed using 4Peaks v1.7.2 (Amsterdam, The Netherlands), Sequencher v5.0.1 (Ann Arbor, MI, USA) and BLAST.  The primer sequences are listed in the Supplementary Table 1.  Immunohistochemistry (IHC)  IHC staining with pSTAT3 and CD57 antibodies was performed with Leica BOND-MAX autostainer (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany) to detect the infiltration of LGL cells (CD57 staining) and phosphorylation of STAT3 (pSTAT3 staining). Paraffin sections from five LGL leukemia patients and two healthy control bone marrow biopsies were processed with Bond Polymer Refine Detection kit (Leica Microsystems) using citrate buffer for antigen retrieval. Staining was done with a STAT3 Tyr 705 antibody (9145L, Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA) diluted 1:100 or a CD57 antibody (TB01, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) diluted 1:100.  The slides were analyzed with the Zeiss Axio Imager AX10 microscope (Zeiss, Jena, Germany) and photographed with Nuance FX multispectral tissue imaging system (420–720 nm; PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA, USA). The pictures were managed and prepared with Nuance 3.0.0 (PerkinElmer).  Microarray expression analysis  RNA was extracted from CD8+ cells of patient 1, 2 and 3 as well as from 2 STAT3-mutated LGL-patients. Anonymous Red Cross buffy coat CD4+, CD8+ and NK RNA were used as biological replicates and controls in the experiment. Microarray analysis was performed using the Illumina Human HT-12 v4 BeadChip expression array (Illumina), which targets >47 000 probes in the human genome (cover content from NCBU RefSeq Release 38 and legacy UniGene content). The data were read with an iScan instrument (Illumina) and primary analysis was done with Genome Studio software v2011.1 (Illumina). The results were normalized and log2-transformed with the Chipster open source platform.11 In order to determine the similarity of the expression profiles a distance dendrogram was constructed using Pearson correlation and the average linkage method. Differentially expressed genes were filtered from the data using the empirical Bayes test with P-value cutoff of 0.05.  Microarray data are available in the ArrayExpress database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress) under accession numbers E-MTAB-1611 and E-MTAB-2068.  Go to: Results Clinical characteristics  Three patients who were previously found not to carry STAT3 or STAT5 mutations were selected for exome sequencing. All patients suffered from T-LGL-leukemia with the phenotype CD3+ CD8+CD57+TCRαβ+CD5dim (Figure 1a). Furthermore, all patients harbored a single monoclonal expansion, which was detected by Vbeta-analysis (Figures 1b, ,2a2a and and3a).3a). Two of the patients displayed a major clonal expansion (73 and 89% of CD8+ lymphocytes), whereas one patient had a smaller expansion (28% Table 1). No clonal expansions were detected in the CD4+ lymphocytes.  Figure 1 Figure 1 Flow cytometry, sequencing and Vβ results from patient 1. (a) The lymphocyte expansion of patient 1 showed typical immunophenotype of LGL cells; CD3+CD57+CD8+TCRαβ+CD5dim as shown by the plot. ( ... Figure 2 Figure 2 Sequencing and Vβ results from patient 2. (a) At the time of sample collection, patient 2 presented with a major Vb.20 clone (73%) in the CD8+ population. (b) The somatic variant H126R in BCL11b shown in tumor and control sample ... Figure 3 Figure 3 Sequencing and vbeta results from patient 3. (a) At the time of sample collection, patient 3 presented with a major Vb.3 clone (89.3%) in the CD8+ population. (b) Somatic variant in SLIT2 shown in tumor and control sample using Integrative ... Table 1 Table 1 Clinical characteristics of the patients In all patients, T-LGL leukemia was diagnosed at an advanced age (>60 years). Patients 1 and 2 suffered from concomitant neutropenia, whereas patient 2 also had anemia and monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance that had not required treatment thus far. Patient 3 had no concomitant disorders (more detailed clinical characteristics can be found in Table 1).  Mutations revealed by exome sequencing  Exome sequencing of tumor (CD8+) and healthy (CD4+) cells yielded on average 53 184 000 paired reads that were mapped to the reference genome. The paired-end read length was 99 nucleotides for patient 1 and 101 for patients 2 and 3. The bioinformatics pipeline identified mutations expected to have deleterious impact on protein function based on PolyPhen predictions and conservation scores (Genomic Evolutionary Rate Profiling). On average, patients had 11 high-confidence non-synonymous mutation calls with somatic P-values below 0.01 (see Supplementary Table 2). The variants chosen for validation by PCR are listed in Table 2. Variants were chosen based on P-value, medical relevance and gene expression data from RNA sequencing when available.  Table 2 Table 2 Somatic mutations identified by exome sequencing and validated by capillary sequencing Mutations affecting the STAT3 pathway  Patient 1 was diagnosed with T-LGL leukemia at the age of 70 years and the TCR repertoire assay revealed one minor T-cell clone in the peripheral blood (Vβ7.1: 28% Figure 1b). Exome sequencing of the CD8+ tumor and matched CD4+ control samples revealed 10 nonsynonymous nucleotide variants with P-values below 0.01. These mutations were validated by Sanger sequencing of the CD8+ tumor cells and not detected in the CD4+ healthy cell fraction. The tumor-suppressor gene protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) receptor T (PTPRT) was found to be heterozygously mutated with a variant frequency of 14%, corresponding well to the 28% clone seen in the leukemic sample (Figures 1b–d). PTPRT was previously found to reverse Tyr705 phosphorylation on STAT3, a modification associated with STAT3 deactivation.12 In this novel mutation, a highly conserved hydrophobic valine residue is converted into methionine (V995M). The mutation occurs in the cytoplasmic part of the protein, within the catalytically active tyrosine-protein phosphatase 1 domain (Figure 1e). The PTPRT V995M mutation could therefore affect STAT3 activity by reducing dephosphorylation of Tyr705, thus increasing the expression of STAT3 target genes.  Mutations affecting T-cell survival and activation  Patient 2 was diagnosed with LGL leukemia at the age of 76 years and harbored a major T-cell clone that constituted 73% of all CD8+ cells (Figure 2a). Exome sequencing of patient 2 revealed a H126R mutation in the BCL11B gene (variant frequency 51%) in the CD8+ leukemic cell fraction, but no mutation was detected in CD4+ T cells (Figures 2b and c). RNA sequencing confirmed the expression of the mutation in the CD8+ cell fraction (Table 2). BCL11B is required for T-cell survival and overexpression could effectively increase T-cell activation and proliferation.13 The BCL11B gene is located on chromosome 14 and is primarily expressed in T cells, thymocytes and the brain. In hematopoietic lineages, BCL11B expression is restricted to T cells with transient low levels of expression in some immature NK cells. BCL11B has a key role in both T-cell development and maintenance of T-cell identity.14  This patient also had a missense mutation in RAD21 (E266K), which has a role in the repair of DNA double-strand breaks as well as in chromatid cohesion in mitosis. The deletion of RAD21 in mouse thymocytes leads to defective chromatin architecture at the TCRα locus and limited differentiation of cohesion-deficient thymocytes.15  Patient 3 was diagnosed with LGL-leukemia at the age of 60 years and presented with a major CD8+ clone of 89% at the time of sample collection (Figure 3a). Exome sequencing of the CD8+ LGL cells revealed a W674stop mutation in SLIT2 with a variant frequency of 54% (Figures 3b and d). No mutation was detected in the CD4+ control fraction. The mutation is located within a cysteine-rich domain (RRCT3) bordering to a LRR-domain, which is hypothesized to mediate protein–protein interactions. SLIT2 is a secreted glycoprotein that possesses anti-inflammatory properties. In addition, SLIT2 has been shown to modulate CXCR4-mediated functional effects in T cells.16  Another mutation, NRP1 V391M, was detected with a frequency of 37% in the patients' tumor sample (Figures 3c and e). The site is highly conserved and located within the Discoidin domain (F5/8 type C domain), which is a major domain of many blood coagulation factors. NRP1 was originally known as a receptor for the semaphorin 3 subfamily mediating neuronal guidance and axonal growth. NRP1 also binds the vascular endothelial growth factor and mediates interactions between dendritic cells (DCs) and T-cells that are essential for the initiation of the primary immune response.17  Screening of the mutations in LGL leukemia patient cohort  In order to validate the findings in a large cohort of LGL leukemia patients, we collected samples from 113 LGL leukemia patients who were STAT3 and STAT5 mutation negative. PCR primers were designed to cover the mutation sites of PTPRT, BCL11b, SLIT2 and NRP1 (Supplementary Table 1) and samples were screened with Sanger sequencing. No additional patients were found to have mutations at the tested sites.  Gene expression analysis of STAT3 mutation-negative LGL leukemia patients  Microarray gene expression analysis was performed with CD8+ RNA from three STAT mutation-negative patients and two patients with known STAT3 mutations. CD4+, CD8+ and NK-cell fractions from healthy controls were used as biological replicates on the microarray. In the distance dendrogram based on the gene expression profile (Figure 4a), healthy CD4+, CD8+ and NK fractions clustered together, whereas LGL leukemia patients formed a separate cluster. In the LGL-leukemia cluster, patients were situated independently of STAT mutation status, suggesting that the expression profiles are quite similar. This was further emphasized when analyzing the differential gene expression between LGL leukemia patients with or without STAT3 mutation: no genes were significantly over- or underexpressed. Comparison between all five LGL patients and the CD8+ healthy controls revealed 39 genes to be differentially expressed (Figure 4b). FGR, a member of the Src family of kinases, was overexpressed in the LGL leukemia patients when compared with healthy controls. It has been shown that FGR, like other Src family of kinases, can phosphorylate STAT3 thereby activating the STAT3 pathway.18 FGR is also activated by BCR-ABL in B-lymphoid cells in acute B lymphoblastic leukemia patients.19  Figure 4 Figure 4 RNA expression data. (a) Distance dendrogram visualizing the clustering of LGL leukemia patients and healthy controls (NK, CD4+ and CD8+ cells) based on their gene expression profiles. (b) Heatmap representing the gene expression profiles ... The transmembrane receptor SLAMF6, which mediates important regulatory signals between immune cells through hemophilic or heterophilic interaction, was also overexpressed in LGL leukemia patients. SLAMF6 appears to co-stimulate especially CD8+ and CD4/CD8 double-negative T cells, whereas SLAM signaling has also been shown to be involved in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases, including systemic lupus erythematosus.20 Interestingly, tumor necrosis factor was expressed at a lower level in LGL leukemia patients when compared with healthy CD8+ cells.  STAT3 activation in STAT3 mutation-negative patients  Bone marrow biopsy samples from two healthy controls and five LGL patients with different mutational status were studied with IHC staining of CD57 and pSTAT3 expression (Figure 5). LGL cells typically express CD57 on their surface and IHC staining showed that bone marrow samples from LGL leukemia patients were infiltrated with CD57-expressing LGL cells, whereas no such infiltration was observed in bone marrow samples from healthy controls. Three of the LGL leukemia patients included in the IHC staining were STAT mutation positive; two patients harbored STAT3 mutations (Y640F and D661V, Figure5c) and one patient a STAT5 Y665F mutation (Figure 5d). These patients presented with positive pSTAT3 staining in the infiltrated lymphocytes indicating STAT3 activation. Phosphorylated STAT3 was also observed in bone marrow biopsy samples of LGL patients with PTPRT and BCL11B mutations, whereas no pSTAT3 was observed in normal bone marrow. No bone marrow biopsy sample was available from patient with SLIT2 and NRP1 mutations.  Figure 5 Figure 5 Immunohistochemical staining of bone marrow-biopsy samples. Bone marrow-biopsy samples from a healthy control and five LGL leukemia patients were stained with CD57 and pSTAT3 antibodies. (a) Healthy control, (b) patients without STAT-mutations, (c) patients ... Go to: Discussion Our previous findings showed that somatic mutations either in the STAT3 or STAT5 gene occur in approximately 40–50% of LGL leukemia cases.4, 6 However, as the STAT3 and STAT5 mutation-negative patients also have monoclonal expansion of LGL cells, other somatic mutations may drive these expansions. In this paper, we showed that mutations in the PTPRT, BCL11B, SLIT2 and NRP1 genes represent rare genetic triggers for T-LGL leukemia. These mutations are biologically relevant as they are connected either to the STAT3 pathway or T-cell activation and proliferation.  Previous studies have shown that almost all LGL leukemia patients exhibit activation of STAT3, indicating that this pathway is essential for the pathogenesis of LGL leukemia.21, 22 We recently confirmed that also LGL leukemia patients without STAT3 mutations have activation of STAT3 responsive genes.4 Similarly, in this study, we showed that STAT3 was also phosphorylated in LGL patients without actual STAT3 mutations, and that LGL leukemia patients clustered closely together in the RNA expression analysis independently of their mutational status. Therefore, the novel V995M mutation in the PTPRT gene is particularly interesting as it may directly impact the STAT3 pathway. The mutation was found within the phosphatase domain D1 that is actively responsible for the phosphatase activity of type IIb members. The PTPRT gene encoding PTPρ is also frequently mutated in other cancers such as in lung and gastric cancer.23  Pasquo et al.24previously studied the effect of missense mutations (D927G, Q987K, A1118P and N1128I) in the D1 domain on PTPRT stability and activation. All the mutants showed a decrease in thermal stability and activation energy for phosphatase activity with respect to the wild-type protein. At 37 °C, the phosphatase activity of all the variants was significantly reduced and the most destabilizing mutation, D927G, yielded a protein that at physiological temperature was almost completely inactive. We therefore hypothesize that inactivating mutations of the PTPRT gene may have the same functional consequence as activating mutations of STAT3 in LGL leukemia patients. Furthermore, PTPRT was previously found to reverse Tyr705 phosphorylation on STAT3, a modification associated with STAT3 deactivation.12 The PTPRT V995M mutation may thereby affect STAT3 activity by reducing dephosphorylation of Tyr705, thus increasing the expression of STAT3 target genes. This is in accordance with our results showing that patient 1 with the PTPRT mutation had increased phosphorylation of STAT3 and activation of STAT3 responsive genes.  In order to clonally expand, T cells must have acquired a survival advantage. It has been shown that some LGL leukemia patients have resistance to FAS-mediated apoptosis, which could be mediated through STAT3 activation.25 However, in addition to defects in apoptotic pathways, survival pathways such as PI3K-AKT may be activated in LGL leukemia patients.21 Therefore, it was of interest to observe that one T-LGL leukemia patient harbored a novel missense mutation H126R in the BCL11B gene. BCL11B functions as a transcription factor that is required for normal T-cell development. Inactivation of BCL11B in murine thymocytes leads to developmental arrest at the DN2-DN3 stage and aberrant self-renewal activity.26, 27 The role of BCL11B in the pathogenesis of hematological diseases still remains controversial. Increased levels of BCL11B expression have been found to be associated with human T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL),28 and the inhibition of BCL11B expression in malignant T cells results in apoptosis.29 Downregulation of BCL11B gene expression by small interfering RNA led to growth inhibition and apoptosis in a human T-ALL cell line, although not in normal mature T and CD34+ cells.30 Furthermore, BCL11B knockdown in Jurkat cells induces apoptosis, whereas BCL11B overexpression in Jurkat cells induces cell cycle arrest under genotoxic stress, which is consistent with the oncogenic properties of BCL11B.29, 31 Mutations in BCL11B have been reported in two separate studies of T-ALL patients; missense mutations and deletions were found in 9% of 117 unselected T-ALL patients22 and in 16% of 71 TLX1-overexpressing T-ALL cases.32, 33 In addition to BCL11B mutation, same patient also had a mutation in the RAD21 gene in the CD8+ fraction. RAD21 has previously been found to be mutated in AML with a prevalence of 4.1% (7/170). In AML, the mutations were distributed over the whole gene and consisted of missense, nonsense and synonymous variants.34  SLIT2 belongs to a group of large secreted glycoproteins originally described in regulating neural migration.35 However, its predominant receptor Robo1 belongs to a novel subfamily of immunoglobulin superfamily proteins36 and is also expressed in several nonneuronal tissues, including leukocytes. It has also been shown that SLIT2 can inhibit T-cell chemotaxis induced by chemotactic factors through chemokine receptors CXCL12/CXCR4.16 According to COSMIC, mutations in SLIT2 have never been found in hematopoietic or lymphoid tissues before, making the stop-gained mutation W674stop unique in this aspect. Previously, SLIT2 has been found frequently methylated in lung, breast, colorectal and glial tumors and it has been shown that SLIT2 can act as a tumor-suppressor gene in breast and colorectal cancer cells.37 Dunwell et al.38 demonstrated frequent SLIT2 methylation in hematologic malignancies (both chronic lymphocytic leukemia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia), hence providing further evidence to support a role for SLIT2 in cancer development.  NRP1, a receptor involved in axon guidance, is also expressed in human DCs and resting T cells.17 Interestingly, earlier studies have shown that NRP1 can have a role in the primary immune response during the formation of immunological synapse between DCs and resting T cells. The preincubation of DCs, but also of resting T cells with blocking NRP1 antibodies inhibited the DC-induced proliferation of T cells. Thus, the mutation in NRP1 gene may affect the activation status or proliferation capacity of T cells.  These novel mutations affecting either the STAT3 or the T-cell activation pathway were not detected in additional patients in our screening cohort (n=113). It could be that the STAT3/STAT5 mutation-negative patients are a more heterogeneous patient cohort, and therefore no similar dominant mutations (such as STAT3) will be found in this group. However, in the screening assays, the primers covered only the mutation spots and nearby base pairs, and it is possible that by screening the whole genes, some additional mutations in the same genes will be found. Especially, inactivating mutations in PTPRT warrant more extensive sequencing of the whole PTPRT gene as these mutations, unlike activating mutations in STAT3, do not cluster in hotspots.  In conclusion, somatic mutations in PTPRT, BCL11B, SLIT2 and NRP1 represent potential genetic cause for LGL leukemia. The similarities in the gene expression profile and the observation of STAT3 phosphorylation in the bone marrow biopsy samples of patients without STAT3 mutations suggest that the novel LGL leukemia-associated mutations lead to the activation of STAT3 pathway and to similar disease phenotype as seen in patients with actual activating STAT3 mutations.  Protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) receptor T (PTPRT) is the most frequently mutated PTP in human cancers. However, the cell signaling pathways regulated by PTPRT have not yet been elucidated. Here, we report identification of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) as a substrate of PTPRT. Phosphorylation of a tyrosine at amino acid Y705 is essential for the function of STAT3, and PTPRT specifically dephosphorylated STAT3 at this position. Accordingly, overexpression of normal PTPRT in colorectal cancer cells reduced the expression of STAT3 target genes. These studies illuminate a mechanism regulating the STAT3 pathway and suggest that this signaling pathway plays an important role in colorectal tumorigenesis.  Keywords: colorectal cancer, tyrosine phosphorylation, signaling Tyrosine phosphorylation is coordinately controlled by protein tyrosine kinases and protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) and is a central feature of many signaling pathways involved in tumor development (1). While activating mutations in protein tyrosine kinases have been shown to play vital roles in tumorigenesis, the role of PTPs is less well defined. We recently identified PTP receptor T (PTPRT), also known as PTPρ, as the most frequently mutated PTP gene in colorectal cancers (CRCs) (2). PTPRT was also mutationally altered in lung and gastric cancers (2). The spectrum of mutations, which included nonsense mutations and frameshift changes, suggested that these alterations were inactivating. Biochemical analyses demonstrated that missense mutations in the catalytic domains of PTPRT diminished its phosphatase activity and overexpression of PTPRT inhibited CRC cell growth (2). Taken together, these studies strongly support the notion that PTPRT normally acts as a tumor suppressor gene. This conclusion was buttressed by a transposon-based somatic mutagenesis screen in mice, wherein PTPRT was isolated as a target gene from two different mouse transgenic sarcomas (3). In light of these data, it is important to understand the mechanisms through which PTPRT is involved in the neoplastic process. Identifying substrates of PTPRT is an important step to elucidating the signal transduction pathways regulated by this phosphatase. Here, we report identification of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) as a substrate of PTPRT.  STAT3 has been shown to play an important role in leukemias, and persistent STAT3 activation has been detected in a variety of hematopoietic malignancies and solid tumors (4–6), including CRCs (7, 8). In general, latent cytoplasmic STAT3 becomes activated through phosphorylation of amino acid residue Y705 by cytokine receptor-associated kinase (Jak) or growth factor receptor-associated tyrosine kinase (Src) (6). Phosphorylated STAT3 dimerizes through reciprocal Src homology 2–phosphotyrosine interaction and accumulates in the nucleus (6). STAT3 then activates the transcription of a wide array of genes, including Bcl-XL and SOCS3 (4). In the current study, we demonstrate that PTPRT specifically dephosphorylates Y705 residue of STAT3 and regulates its target gene expression and its cellular localization in CRC cells.  Go to: RESULTS AND DISCUSSION STAT3 Is a Substrate of PTPRT. To identify potential substrates of PPTRT, we generated two ecdysone-inducible HEK293T cell lines: one expressing the intracellular part containing the two phosphatase domains of PTPRT and the other expressing the extracellular portion of the protein. We used the proteomic approach developed by Rush et al. (9) to globally profile tyrosine phosphopeptides in the two cell lines and parental HEK293T cells (see Materials and Methods). Phosphopeptides derived from five different proteins were present in parental HEK293T cells and cells expressing the extracellular portion of PTPRT but not in cells expressing the intracellular portion. We chose STAT3 of the five candidate substrates for further study, because STAT3 was known to be involved in tumorigenesis.  Importantly, the phosphorylation site identified in our proteomic profiling was Y705, the residue known to be critical for activation of STAT3 signal transduction. To confirm that PTPRT regulates phosphorylation of Y705, lysates from the inducible cell lines were probed with antibodies specific for the phosphorlyated form of Y705. As shown in Fig. 1A, STAT3 phosphorylation was reduced ≈5-fold by induction of the phosphatase domain PTPRT but was unaffected by induction of the extracellular domain. Expression of full-length PTPRT also led to STAT3 dephosphorylation of Y705 in HEK293T cells (Fig. 1B). To test whether PTPRT regulates STAT3 phosphorylation under physiological conditions, we knocked down PTPRT expression by ≈80% in MCF-7 cells by using siRNA specifically against PTPRT. As shown in Fig. 1C, STAT3 phosphorylation increased ≈3-fold in cells transfected with PTPRT siRNA compared with cells transfected with a scrambled siRNA control.  Fig. 1. Fig. 1. STAT3 is a substrate of PTPRT. (A) Cell lysates from inducible cell lines expressing either the intracellular (Intra) or extracellular fragment (Extra) of PTPRT were probed with antibodies specific for pY705 of STAT3. The same membrane was stripped and ... Although the initiators of STAT3 signal transduction in some cell types, particularly of hematopoietic lineage, are well known, STAT3 transduction has not been studied in depth in colorectal epithelial cells. In particular, ligands that trigger STAT3 activation in such cells were not known. To address this issue, we used the CRC cell line HCT116 to assess the effects of cytokines and growth factors that were known to induce STAT3 activation in other cell types (see Materials and Methods). Among the factors examined, the only one that activated STAT3 was IL-6. Because IL-6 plays a direct role in promoting the growth of CRC cells (10, 11), it was important to determine whether PTPRT regulates STAT3 activation in CRC cells stimulated with IL-6. As shown in Fig. 1D, expression of PTPRT reduced STAT3 activation by ≈3-, 8-, and 10-fold that of GFP controls after 60, 120, and 180 min of IL-6 stimulation, respectively. Note that only the phosphorylation status of STAT3, not its total levels, was affected by PTPRT, thereby excluding protein degradation as a cause of these effects. Other controls were provided by STAT1 and STAT5. No STAT1 protein could be detected in these cells, with or without exposure to IL-6, and STAT5 phosphorylation was not altered by IL-6 or PTPRT (Fig. 1E). The activation of STAT3 by IL-6 was not confined to HCT116, as three additional CRC cell lines each showed dramatic induction of phosphorlyated STAT3 by IL-6 without any change in the level of total STAT3 proteins (Fig. 1 F–I).  STAT3 Is a Direct Substrate of PTPRT. We have demonstrated unambiguously that PTPRT regulates STAT3 phosphorylation, but did not prove that the dephosphorylation was directly mediated by PTPRT rather than through another phosphatase downstream of PTRPT. To address this point, we used a substrate-trapping assay modified from that described for investigation of an unrelated phosphatase (PTP1B) (12). Three GST fusion proteins were constructed for this purpose. All contained both phosphatase domains of PTPRT, but two of them (TRAP-1 and TRAP-2) contained mutations predicted to result in substrate trapping (D1074A in TRAP-1 and C1106S and D1074A in TRAP-2). The recombinant GST fusion proteins were expressed in Escherichia coli, and equal amounts of each were attached to beads (Fig. 2A). The beads were then incubated with cell lysates from SW480 CRC cells. The phosphorylated form of STAT3 was specifically bound by the two substrate trapping mutants but not by the WT or control GST proteins. In contrast, STAT5 was not bound by the substrate trapping mutants (Fig. 2B). Similar results were also observed with cell lysates from HEK293T cells and HT29 CRC cells (Fig. 2C). Furthermore, to test whether PTPRT directly dephosphorylates pSTAT3 in vitro, we incubated pSTAT3 that immunoprecipitated from HEK293T cells as phosphatase substrates with equal amounts of WT, TRAP-2 mutant, or GST proteins with or without phosphatase inhibitor Na3VO4. STAT3 was dephosphorylated by WT but not the phosphatase dead mutant (TRAP-2) or GST alone (Fig. 2D). This activity was also inhibited by Na3VO4, indicating that it was phosphatase dependent (Fig. 2D).  Fig. 2. Fig. 2. STAT3 is a direct substrate of PTPRT. (A) Coomassie-stained gels of GST fusion proteins eluted from the indicated beads before their incubation with cell lysates. The arrow indicates the fusion proteins. (B) SW480 cell lysates were incubated with beads ... PTPRT Regulates STAT3 Activity. Phosphorylated STAT3 is thought to translocate to the nucleus and activate transcription of its target genes, including Bcl-XL and SOCS3 (4). To determine whether dephosphorylation of STAT3 by PTPRT affects expression of such target genes, CRC cells were exposed to IL-6 and then treated with the PTPRT adenovirus. As shown in Fig. 3A, Bcl-XL and SOCS3 protein expression was induced by IL-6 in HCT116 CRC cells, as predicted. Moreover, their expression levels were down-regulated >4-fold by PTPRT.  Fig. 3. Fig. 3. Regulation of STAT3 activity by PTPRT. (A) HCT116 cells were infected with adenoviruses expressing PTPRT or GFP, starved for 24 h, and then stimulated with IL-6. Lysates were used in Western blots to assess the levels of the indicated proteins. (B) Schematic ... PTPRT consists of an extracelluar domain, a juxtamembrane region, and two phosphatase domains called D1 and D2 (Fig. 3B). To determine which of the phosphatase domains is required for STAT3 dephosphorylation, adenoviruses expressing PTPRT devoid of the second domain (Del D2) or devoid of both domains (Del D1D2) were generated (Fig. 3B). Each of these PTPRT proteins contained a V5 epitope tag at its C terminus to allow comparison of PTPRT expression levels after infection of HCT116 CRC cells. Expression of the WT PTPRT led to a substantial reduction of phosphoryation of pSTAT3 (Fig. 3C) and an equivalent reduction of expression of the STAT3 targets Bcl-XL and SOCS3 (Fig. 3D). It is generally believed that the second phosphatase domains (D2) of receptor PTPs do not have functionally significant phosphatase activity (13). However, the results in Fig. 3 C and D show that deletion of D2 was associated with a decrease of PTPRT activity compared with WT. This reduction could result from either the loss of an intrinsic enzymatic activity of D2, the disruption of the functional communication between D2 and D1 (14, 15), or a perturbation of the structure of the PTPRT protein upon deletion of its D2 domain.  PTPRT Regulates STAT3 Cellular Localization. Phosphosphorylated STAT3 is known to dimerize and translocate from the cytoplasm to the nucleus before binding to the promoter of its target genes. To examine the effect of PTPRT on the subcellular localization of STAT3, we examined the cells described in the above experiment with immunofluorescence. Note that the adenoviruses used for these experiments were constructed with the AdEasy system (16), so each coexpressed GFP, allowing distinction between infected and noninfected cells. STAT3 proteins translocated into nuclei after IL-6 stimulation in cells infected with the control GFP virus (Fig. 4). However, STAT3 staining remained diffuse, throughout the cytoplasm, after expression of WT PTPRT, whether or not the cells were treated with IL-6. In contrast, there was no effect on STAT3 translocation after IL-6 stimulation in cells expressing the PTPRT devoid of both its phosphatase domains (Fig. 4).  Fig. 4. Fig. 4. PTPRT regulates STAT3 cellular localization. HCT116 cells were infected with adenoviruses expressing GFP or the indicated forms of PTPRT. Virus-infected cells were starved for 24 h and then stimulated with or without IL-6 for 30 min. Immunofluorescent ... Regulation of Y705 phosphorylation is critical for STAT3 activation (6). Although the kinases that phosphorylate Y705 of STAT3 have been studied extensively, the phosphatases that dephosphorylate this critical residue have not been clearly defined. It has been reported that the T cell PTP (TC-PTP) can regulate STAT3 phosphorylation (17), but it was not clear whether TC-PTP specifically dephosphorylates the pY705 residue. Most recently, the low molecular weight-dual specificity phosphatase (LMW-DSP2) has been shown to regulate Y705 phosphorylation of STAT3 (18). However, no evidence indicates that STAT3 is a direct substrate of LMW-DSP2. Furthermore, neither of the two previously studied phosphatases plays a role in epithelial cell growth. From the results of the current study, it is clear not only that STAT3 is a direct substrate of PTPRT but also that PTPRT specifically regulates Y705 phosphorylation of STAT3, the ability of STAT3 to transcriptionally activate its target genes and the subcellular localization of STAT3.  How a membrane-localized PTPRT gains access and dephosphorylates STAT3 is an interesting question raised by this study. We propose that PTPRT dephosphorylates pSTAT3 through three possible mechanisms. One is that dephosphorylation of pSTAT3 by PTPRT occurs at the time when STAT3 is activated by receptor-associated kinases, such as Jaks and SRC. The second is that PTPRT dephosphorylates the pSTAT3 pool by taking advantage of the STAT3 shuttling mechanism. A recent study has indicated that STAT3 constitutively shuttles between the cytoplasm and nucleus (19). Finally, PTPRT, like the notch proteins (20), could be cleaved by a protease after activation and the intracellular portion containing the phosphatase domains could translocate into nucleus and dephosphorylate STAT3. Further study is needed to define the mechanism through which PTPRT gains access to pSTAT3.  In summary, our data suggest that the STAT3 pathway may play an important role in the growth of CRC cells. Moreover, our results have obvious therapeutic implications, as one could imagine inhibiting CRC growth through inhibition of STAT3 tyrosine phosphorylation. Finally, the proteomic approach described in this study may be applicable to the identification of substrates of other PTPs.
57||The receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase T (PTPRT/PTPρ) is the most frequently mutated tyrosine phosphatase in human cancer. PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation. In its extracellular region, PTPρ has cell adhesion molecule-like motifs, including a MAM domain, an immunoglobulin domain and four fibronectin type III (FNIII) repeats. Tumor-derived mutations have been identified in all of these extracellular domains. Previously, we determined that tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and immunoglobulin domains of PTPρ reduce homophilic cell-cell aggregation. In this manuscript, we describe experiments in which we evaluated the contribution of the FNIII repeats to PTPρ-mediated cell-cell adhesion. Our results demonstrate that deletion of the FNIII repeats of PTPρ result in defective cell-cell aggregation. Furthermore, all of the tumor-derived mutations in the FNIII repeats of PTPρ also disrupt cell-cell aggregation. These results further support the hypothesis that mutational inactivation of PTPρ may lead to cancer progression by disrupting cell-cell adhesion.  Keywords: Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase, PTPRT, PTPρ, fibronectin type III repeat, cell-cell aggregation, cell-cell adhesion Go to: 1. Introduction Cancer progression and metastasis is in part influenced by changes in cell adhesion and tyrosine phosphorylation mediated by cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) (Paschos et al. 2009; Wheelock et al. 2008), as well as tyrosine kinases and tyrosine phosphatases, respectively (Freiss and Vignon 2004; Ostman et al. 2006). Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatases (RPTPs) comprise a family of proteins that have extracellular CAM domains coupled to cytoplasmic tyrosine phosphatase domains, and thus can impact cancer progression by regulating both cell adhesion and tyrosine phosphorylation (Brady-Kalnay 2001; Ostman et al. 2006).  The type IIB PTPμ-like subfamily of RPTPs includes PTPμ, PTPρ, PTPκ, and PCP-2 (PTPλ) (Aricescu et al. 2008; Brady-Kalnay 2001). The extracellular segment of the PTPμ-like RPTPs contain motifs found in CAMs, including a MAM domain, an immunoglobulin (Ig) domain and four fibronectin type III (FNIII) repeats (Aricescu et al. 2008; Brady-Kalnay 2001; Ostman et al. 2006). PTPμ subfamily members bind homophilically (i.e. the “ligand” for PTPμ is an identical PTPμ molecule on an adjacent cell) (Brady-Kalnay et al. 1993; Cheng et al. 1997; Gebbink et al. 1993; Sap et al. 1994; Yu et al. 2008; Zondag et al. 1995). The Ig domain of PTPμ is responsible for promoting homophilic interactions (Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994), and proper cell surface localization (Del Vecchio and Tonks 2005). However, both the MAM and Ig domains as well as the first two FNIII repeats are required for efficient cell-cell adhesion of PTPμ (Aricescu et al. 2006; Aricescu et al. 2007; Aricescu et al. 2008; Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Cismasiu et al. 2004; Zondag et al. 1995). PTPρ and PTPκ also mediate homophilic cell-cell adhesion (Sap et al. 1994; Yu et al. 2008). However, PCP2 has not yet been demonstrated to mediate cell-cell adhesion or aggregation although in vitro binding studies indicate it can bind homophilically (Cheng et al. 1997).  All type IIB RPTPs are potential tumor suppressor genes (Burgoyne et al. 2009a; Flavell et al. 2008; McArdle et al. 2001; Yan et al. 2006). Notably, PTPρ is the most frequently mutated phosphatase gene in human cancers including colon, lung, skin and stomach cancers (Forbes et al. 2008; Wang et al. 2004). Defective adhesion mediated by PTPρ may be at least one mechanism of cancer progression. In fact, cancer derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ are defective in mediating cell-cell aggregation (Yu et al. 2008).  In addition to the tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ previously described (Wang et al. 2004; Yu et al. 2008), the majority of extracellular domain mutations are located in the FNIII repeats of PTPρ (Wang et al. 2004). Given the importance of FNIII repeats in PTPμ-mediated adhesion and aggregation (Aricescu et al. 2007), we tested the contribution of the FNIII repeats of PTPρ to PTPρ-mediated adhesion. We determined that deletion constructs where each of the extracellular domains of PTPρ is removed, including the FNIII repeats, are defective in mediating cell-cell aggregation of Sf9 cells. Furthermore, when we engineered the cancer-derived mutations in the FNIII repeats of these PTPρ mutant proteins, they also result in defective cell-cell aggregation. These results demonstrate the importance of the FNIII repeats in contributing to proper cell-cell adhesion and suggest that adhesion mediated by PTPρ is likely important for the tumor suppressor activity of PTPρ.  Go to: 2. Materials and methods 2.1 Baculovirus generation  Baculoviruses were generated by transfecting cells with the BaculoGold™ Linearized Baculovirus DNA (BD Biosciences, San Diego, CA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The baculovirus for wild-type PTPρ was previously described (Yu et al. 2008).  2.2 Sf9 cell culture  Insect Sf9 cells from (BD Biosciences) were maintained at 27°C in Graces Insect Medium (BD Biosciences). The medium was supplemented with 10% FBS from (Hyclone, Logan, UT) and Gentamicin (MP Biomedicals, Solon, OH). Viruses were added to Sf9 cell medium to induce the expression of proteins of interest. Cells were harvested 30 hours post-infection for further analysis.  2.3 Generation of PTPRT deletion constructs  The PTPρ-ΔMAM, PTPρ-ΔIg, PTPρ-ΔFNIII-1, PTPρ-ΔFNIII-2, PTPρ-ΔFNIII-3 and PTPρ-ΔFNIII-4 constructs were generated by fusion PCR using the full-length PTPRT pVL1393-V5-His vector as the template. The primers 5’-GAAGATCTATGGCGAGCCTCGCCGCG-3’ and 5’-CCGGAATTCGGATCCTGGGGCGCTCTGAGCCCGGG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔMAM construct; the primers 5’-GCGTGGGAGGCTCTCTGCATGGATGAGCAAGGAC-3’ and 5’-CAATGGGTCTTGCTCATCCATGCAGAGAGCCTCCCACGCCCATTG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔIg construct; the primers 5’-CTGCACACTTGGTCCTGGTTTTCACGATCAGCTCCGCGTA-3’ and 5’-TACGCGGAGCGTCGTGAAAACCAGGACCAAGTGTGCAG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-1 construct; the primers 5’-CCGCCAGGGCCTCCCCTCACCGAGGAAGACGTTCCAGGAG-3’ and 5’-CTCCTGGAACGTCTTCCTCGGTGAGGGGAGGCCCTGGCGG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-2 construct; the primers 5’-GAGGAGCTGGTGGTGCAGACTAAAATTTCAGCTCCATCCA-3’ and 5’-TGGATGGAGCTGAAATTTTAGTCTGCACCACCAGCTCCTC-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-3 construct and the 5’-GTCACCACTCGGATTGCCACCGGTGCCTCCACCCAGAATT-3’ and 5’-AATTCTGGGTGGAGGCACCGGTGGCAATCCGAGTGGTGAC-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-4 construct.  2.4 Immunoblotting  Sf9 cells were lysed in a standard lysis buffer (20 mM Tris·HCl, pH 7.5, 1% Triton X-100, 150 mM sodium chloride, 2 mM Benzamidine, 2.5μg/ml Aprotinin, 2.5μg/ml Leupeptin, and 0.5μg/ml Pepstatin). Samples were solubilized in 2X SDS loading buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE. Samples were transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (Whatman, Piscataway, NJ) and immunoblotted with SK18 (Brady-Kalnay et al. 1993), which cross-reacts with PTPρ.  2.5 Cell surface expression of PTPρ  Cell surface expression of PTPρ protein in baculovirus infected Sf9 cells was determined using a modified biotin-avidin reaction with the Cell Surface Protein Isolation Kit (catalog# 89991, Pierce, Rockford, IL), as previously described (Yu et al. 2008). Briefly, Sf9 cell media was removed and the flasks were incubated with rocking for 30 minutes at 4°C in 5ml of 0.25mg/ml Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin in 1X PBS. The cells were mechanically removed from the flask, centrifuged, washed, and lysed according to the manufacturer’s protocols. To isolate cell surface expressed PTPρ the cell lysate was added to a NeutrAvidin Gel column and incubated for 60 min at room temperature (RT) with rocking prior to washing and eluting proteins with 200μl of sample buffer containing a final concentration of 55mM DTT for 60min at RT. The flow through was run on 6% SDS-PAGE gels and transferred to nitrocellulose. Total cell surface protein levels were normalized by immunoblotting cell lysates with an anti-actin antibody (JLA20). The normalized cell surface protein was run on 6% SDS-PAGE gels, transferred to nitrocellulose and immunoblotted with antibodies to PTPμ that also recognized PTPρ (SK18) followed by secondary antibody conjugated to HRP. The HRP signal was detected using a Fluor-S MAX MultiImager (Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc., Hercules, CA).  2.6 Aggregation Assays  Sf9 cells were harvested by trituration. The cell suspensions were added to glass scintillation vials and incubated at 27°C at 90 rpm in a gyratory shaker for 30 minutes. For a given condition, the cell suspension was transferred to a 100mm petri dish either prior to (0 time point) or 30 minutes after aggregation. Images were captured at 10X magnification with a Nikon TE-200 inverted fluorescent microscope (Tokyo, Japan). To quantify cell aggregates, pictures of four randomly selected fields were taken per dish. The area of each object (single cells and aggregates) was determined by the Metamorph software (Molecular Devices) using an auto-threshold setting for light objects and appropriate size filters that allowed the counting of cells and aggregates but not debris. The four replicates were combined to yield average readings per condition. The percent aggregation was then calculated as the average aggregate area at 30 minutes minus the average aggregate area at zero minutes divided by the average aggregate area at 30 minutes [(N30-N0)/N30]. A minimum of three independent experiments was performed per condition. Statistical significance was determined in Microsoft Excel using Student’s T-test. Error bars indicate standard error.  2.7 Site-directed mutagenesis  The I395V, Y412F, R453C, Q479E, S492F, N510K, T605M, V648G, A707T, and L708P tumor-derived mutations (Wang et al. 2004) were generated by fusion PCR using the full-length PTPRT pVL1393-V5-His vector as the template. The primers 5’-TGGCCCACAGAACGTGGAAGTCGTAGACATCAGAGCC-3’ and 5’-CTTCCACGTTCTGTGGGCCA-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the I395V mutant; the primers 5’-CAGTGGGAGCCCTTCGGCTTCGCGGTGACCCGCTGCCAT-3’ and 5’-AAGCCGAAGGGCTCCCACTG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the Y412F mutant; the primers 5’-CTACACCCTGCGAGGCCTGTGCCCCTTCATGACCATCCG-3’ and 5’-ACAGGCCTCGCAGGGTGTAG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the R453C mutant; the primers 5’-GAGCGAGGAGCTGGTGGTGGAGACTGAGGAAGACGTTCC-3’ and 5’-CCACCACCAGCTCCTCGCTC-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the Q479E mutant; the primers 5’-TGTTCCTCTAGAATTCATCCAAGGGGGGCCCT TT-3’ and 5’-ATGAATTCTAGAGGAACA-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the S492F mutant; the primers 5’-TCCAGTGGAAACCTCCCAAGGAGACCAATGGGGTCATCA-3’ and 5’-CTTGGGAGGTTTCCACTGGA-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the N510K mutant; the primers 5’-CCATTGAATGAGACAGACATGACC ATCACAGTGATGCTG3-’ and 5’-ATGTCTGTCTCATTCAATGG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the T605M mutant; the primers 5’-ATTATTGAGTGCTTTTC GGGGCCCGTGAGCTATCGGAAT-3’ and 5’-CCCGAAAAGCACTCAATAAT-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the V648G mutant; the primers 5’-CTACAGCATCTACTTCCAGACACTCAGCAAAGCCAATGG-3’ and 5’-TCTGGAAGTAGATGCTGTAG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the A707T mutant; the primers 5’-AGCATCTACTTCCAGGCACCCAGCAAAGCCAATGGAGAG-3’ and 5’-GGTGCCTGGAAGTAGATGCT-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the L708P mutant.  2.8 Mapping of PTPρ mutations onto the PTPμ crystal structure  The sequence of PTPμ and PTPρ were aligned using CLUSTALW. Mutations probed in this study were mapped using this sequence alignment onto the PTPμ structure (PDB ID: 2V5Y). The figure was prepared utilizing PyMOL 1.2r1 (http://pymol.org).  Go to: 3. Results 3.1 Deletions in the MAM, Ig, and FNIII repeat domains of PTPρ result in defective cell-cell aggregation  To test whether a protein mediates cell-cell aggregation or adhesion, one has to express the protein of interest in the non-adhesive cells. Otherwise, one cannot measure the aggregation or adhesion of a single molecule in the sea of other adhesion molecules naturally expressed in adhesive cells. This is the main reason that the non-adhesive Sf9 or Drosophila S2 cells are widely used models for such studies. To our knowledge, nearly all cell lines of epithelial origin are adhesive cells and thus are not suitable for these studies. Introduction of putative adhesion molecules into non-adhesive Drosophila S2 insect cells has been used to demonstrate adhesive functions for fasciclin II, connectin, Dtrk, ARK, Neuroglian, and Capricious molecules directly (Bellosta et al. 1995; Hortsch et al. 1995; Nose et al. 1992; Pulido et al. 1992; Shinza-Kameda et al. 2006; Snow et al. 1989). In a similar approach, we and others demonstrated that the full-length form of PTPμ induced aggregation, via a homophilic binding mechanism, when expressed in nonadhesive Sf9 insect cells, which are derived from the Fall army-worm Spodoptera frugiperda (Brady-Kalnay et al. 1993; Gebbink et al. 1993; Zondag et al. 1995). We have also used this system for analyzing PTPRT/PTP rho (Yu et al., 2008). Examples of other cell adhesion molecules that have been studied in Sf9 cells include L1 (Gouveia et al. 2008), Galectin-3 (Inohara and Raz 1995) and C-CAM1 (Phan et al. 2001). Insect S2 and Sf9 cells are extremely useful systems to analyze adhesive mechanisms of cell adhesion molecules.  The MAM domain, Ig domain, and first two-FNIII repeats are essential for PTPμ cell-cell aggregation (Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Zondag et al. 1995). To test whether these domains are the minimal essential regions required for PTPρ cell-cell aggregation, baculoviral PTPρ deletion constructs of the MAM domain, Ig domain, and each of the four individual FNIII repeats were made and expressed in non-adhesive Sf9 insect cells (Figure 1). All the PTPρ deletion constructs were expressed and appropriately trafficked to the cell surface (Figure 1). To test whether these domains contribute to PTPρ-dependent adhesion, Sf9 cells were evaluated for their ability to mediate cell-cell aggregation when expressing the deletion constructs. Aggregation assays with Sf9 cells expressing the deletion constructs were conducted alongside aggregation assays using Sf9 cells expressing wild-type PTPρ, which mediates cell-cell aggregation (Figure 2) and serves as a positive control (Yu et al. 2008). Deletion of any of the extracellular domains of PTPρ resulted in defective cell-cell aggregation compared to aggregation of wild-type PTPρ expressing Sf9 cells (Figure 2). Deletion of the fourth FNIII repeat was the least severe where ~23% aggregation was observed. Deletion of the MAM domain, Ig domain and FNIII repeats 1, 2 or 3 resulted in 5–16% aggregation. When the level of aggregation was quantified, we determined that all of the deletion constructs resulted in a large and statistically significant reduction in cell-cell aggregation (Figure 2, p-value<0.005). Together with our previous study, these results demonstrate that all of the extracellular domains of PTPρ are necessary for PTPρ-mediated cell-cell aggregation.  Figure 1 Figure 1 PTPρ deletion constructs are all expressed at the cell surface. Constructs containing deletions of one extracellular domain of PTPρ each were generated and expressed in Sf9 cells. Total cellular protein and cell surface protein were isolated ... Figure 2 Figure 2 Deletion of any of the extracellular domains of PTPρ disrupts cell-cell aggregation. Sf9 cells expressing deletion constructs of the individual extracellular domains of PTPρ were allowed to aggregate for 30 minutes prior to imaging. Scale ... 3.2 Tumor-Derived PTPρ Mutations in the FNIII repeats result in defective cell-cell aggregation  We next tested the effects of human tumor-derived mutations in the FNIII repeats of PTPρ on PTPρ-mediated cell-cell aggregation. We recently demonstrated that tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ are defective in cell-cell aggregation using the Sf9 aggregation assay (Yu et al. 2008), and given the above results, we hypothesized that mutations in the FNIII domains would likewise result in defective aggregation. Ten human tumor-derived mutations are located in the second, third and fourth FNIII repeats of PTPρ (Wang et al. 2004). To test whether these mutations also affect cell-cell aggregation, we engineered the ten human mutations by site-directed mutagenesis using the full-length PTPρ baculoviral construct as a template (see Figure 3). The ten mutations are expressed in Sf9 cells at the expected molecular weight and at similar levels to full-length human PTPρ (Figure 3). All of these mutants are expressed at the cell surface (Figure 3). When these mutant PTPρ proteins were expressed in Sf9 cells and tested in aggregation assays, we observed that all of the mutant PTPρ proteins resulted in fewer and smaller aggregates than wild type PTPρ (Figure 4). When the level of aggregation was quantified, we determined that all of the FNIII mutations significantly reduced cell-cell aggregation (16–43%) compared to cells expressing wild type PTPρ (68% aggregation, p-value<0.008, Figure 4).  Figure 3 Figure 3 PTPρ proteins containing tumor-derived mutations in their FNIII domains are expressed at the cell surface. Ten mutations in the FNIII domains of PTPρ were generated by site-directed mutagenesis and expressed in Sf9 cells. Total cellular ... Figure 4 Figure 4 Tumor derived mutations in FNIII domains of PTPρ are defective in cell-cell aggregation. Sf9 cells expressing the mutated PTPρ proteins were allowed to aggregate for 30 minutes prior to imaging. Scale bar equals 100μm. The percentage ... Go to: 4. Discussion PTPRT/PTPρ is the most highly mutated tyrosine phosphatase in human colon carcinomas. We and others found that PTPRT/ PTPρ is also mutated in lung, gastric and skin (melanoma) cancers (Forbes et al. 2008; Wang et al. 2004). The spectrum of mutations, which included nonsense mutations and frameshifts, suggested that these mutations were inactivating (Wang et al. 2004). Biochemical analyses demonstrated that missense mutations in the catalytic domains of PTPRT diminished its phosphatase activity and overexpression of PTPRT inhibited colon cancer cell growth. Moreover, we showed previously that the tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ are defective in cell-cell adhesion (Yu et al. 2008). All these data suggest that PTPRT/PTPρ normally functions as a tumor suppressor gene. The experiments presented in this manuscript evaluate the contribution of the individual extracellular domains of PTPρ to PTPρ-mediated adhesion. We demonstrate that in addition to the MAM and Ig domains, the FNIII repeats are required for PTPρ-mediated adhesion. Importantly, we also show that PTPρ-mediated adhesion is impaired by human tumor-derived mutations in those FNIII repeats. These studies indicate that all the tumor-derived mutations located in the extracellular domain of PTPRT are loss-of-function mutations, thereby providing further evidence that PTPRT is a tumor suppressor. This notion is further supported by our recent study showing that PTPRT knockout mice are highly susceptible to colon specific carcinogen azoxymethane (AOM)-induced colon cancer (Zhao et al.).  PTPμ-mediated cell-cell aggregation requires the MAM domain, Ig domain, and the first two FNIII repeats (Aricescu et al. 2006; Aricescu et al. 2007; Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Cismasiu et al. 2004; Zondag et al. 1995). The entire extracellular domain of PTPμ is predicted to make a rigid conformation with extensive interfaces between each of the domains (Aricescu et al. 2006). The minimal adhesive unit for functional cell-cell aggregation is the MAM domain, Ig domain and the first two FNIII repeats (Aricescu et al. 2006; Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Zondag et al. 1995). However, the FNIII repeats appear to play a role in spacing the key homophilic interaction domain(s) a certain distance from the plasma membrane. Deletion of the FNIII repeats changed the intercellular spacing of two apposing membranes (Aricescu et al. 2007). Cell-cell aggregation assays of the FNIII deletion constructs were not performed in that study (Aricescu et al. 2007). The amino acid residues of the interfaces between the extracellular domains are highly conserved between members of the type IIB RPTP subfamily (Aricescu et al. 2006; Aricescu et al. 2007) therefore it is likely that the PTPρ adhesive interface resembles that of PTPμ. Together our data support the hypothesis that the essential regions for PTPρ-mediated adhesion resemble those of PTPμ.  To gain insight into how the point mutations may alter the adhesive function of PTPρ, we modeled the human tumor derived PTPρ mutations onto the crystal structure of PTPμ (Figure 5). The crystal structure of PTPμ includes only the first three FNIII repeats (Aricescu et al. 2007). Four of these mutations fall within the second FNIII (FNIII-2) repeat (I395V, Y412F, R453C, Q479E). It is important to note that FNIII-2 is required for efficient cell-cell adhesion (Aricescu et al. 2006). Two of the mutations fall in the third FNIII (FNIII-3) repeat (S492F, N510K). The mutation within the linker region between FNIII-1 and FNII-2 (Y412F) could alter the flexibility or positioning between the two domains. The other mutations (I395V R453C, Q479E, S492F, N510K) appear to be clustered in surface exposed regions and/or near the linker regions between FNIII-2 and FNIII-3 that could alter flexibility, position of individual FNIII repeats and/or protein-protein interactions. While these mutations do not correspond to the adhesive interface hypothesized for PTPμ based upon a single static crystal structure (Aricescu et al. 2007), some of the mutations fall within the FNIII-2 repeat which is required for adhesion, and all of these surface modifications would likely alter either the three-dimensional topology and/or cis/trans interactions of PTPρ.  Figure 5 Figure 5 Structural modeling of the point mutations of PTPρ. The point mutations (indicated in red) evaluated in this manuscript were modeled onto the equivalent sites in the crystal structure of PTPμ. The PTPρ mutations likely alter cell-cell ... Other type IIB RPTPs also function as tumor suppressor genes, by regulating adhesion and/or tyrosine phosphorylation of effector proteins. Expression of PTPμ is reduced in human glioblastomas (GBM) and cell lines (Burgoyne et al. 2009a). Reduction in full-length PTPμ expression with a concomitant increase in a proteolytically processed cytoplasmic fragment of PTPμ is observed in GBM cells and both are correlated with decreased adhesion and increased migration observed in the disease (Burgoyne et al. 2009a; Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Over-expression of the full-length form of PTPμ suppressed migration of GBM cells and reduces their survival (Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Of note, at the same time that stable cell adhesion is reduced due to the loss of full-length PTPμ expression in GBM cells, a catalytically active cytoplasmic fragment of PTPμ is released and translocates to the nucleus (Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Catalytic activity of this fragment is also necessary for cell migration and viability of GBM cells (Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Therefore, both the tyrosine phosphatase activity of the cytoplasmic fragment of PTPμ and the loss of PTPμ-mediated adhesion may contribute to the invasiveness of GBM cells.  PTPκ is also implicated in tumor progression. PTPκ expression is reduced in melanoma cell lines and human tissue biopsies (McArdle et al. 2001), and in Hodgkin’s lymphoma cells (Flavell et al. 2008). Over-expression of PTPκ in Hodgkin lymphoma cells reduces cellular proliferation and survival (Flavell et al. 2008). Like PTPμ, PTPκ is proteolytically processed (Anders et al. 2006), potentially as a result of aberrant glycosylation (Kim et al. 2006). It is not clear whether adhesion or catalytic activity of PTPκ is required for its tumor suppressor activity (Flavell et al. 2008; Kim et al. 2006). Of note, the cleaved cytoplasmic domain fragment of PTPκ is catalytically active, translocates to the nucleus and promotes β-catenin-mediated transcription (Anders et al. 2006). Signaling via the PTPκ cytoplasmic fragment might augment the loss of stable cell-cell adhesion and may promote tumor progression.  Although speculative, it is interesting to postulate that tyrosine phosphatase activity and or cleavage of PTPρ will also be an important element of its tumor suppressor activity, as has been demonstrated for PTPμ and PTPκ. Interestingly, we identified and validated STAT3 as a direct substrate of PTPRT (Zhang et al. 2007). STAT3 is latent transcription factor that translocates from the cytoplasm to the nucleus after being phosphorylated at the Y705 residue. It is possible that the cleaved intracellular fragment of PTPρ, which contains the phosphatase domains, translocates to nucleus and dephosphorylates STAT3. Besco and colleagues found that PTPRT associates with the adhesion molecule E-cadherin and its binding partner p120 catenin, which are PTPRT substrates (Besco et al. 2006). p120 also translocates to the nucleus and associates with the Kaiso transcription factor (Daniel and Reynolds 1999). Given the frequency and distribution of mutations in PTPRT/PTPρ in human colon and other cancers, a more thorough understanding of its biological function is warranted.
58||Tyrosine phosphorylation, regulated by protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) and kinases (PTKs), is important in signaling pathways underlying tumorigenesis. A mutational analysis of the tyrosine phosphatase gene superfamily in human cancers identified 83 somatic mutations in six PTPs (PTPRF, PTPRG, PTPRT, PTPN3, PTPN13, PTPN14), affecting 26% of colorectal cancers and a smaller fraction of lung, breast, and gastric cancers. Fifteen mutations were nonsense, frameshift, or splice-site alterations predicted to result in truncated proteins lacking phosphatase activity. Five missense mutations in the most commonly altered PTP (PTPRT) were biochemically examined and found to reduce phosphatase activity. Expression of wild-type but not a mutant PTPRT in human cancer cells inhibited cell growth. These observations suggest that the mutated tyrosine phosphatases are tumor suppressor genes, regulating cellular pathways that may be amenable to therapeutic intervention. Phosphorylation of tyrosine residues is a central feature of many cellular signaling pathways, including those affecting growth, differentiation, cell cycle regulation, apoptosis, and invasion (1, 2). This phosphorylation is coordinately controlled by protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) and phosphatases (PTPs). Although a variety of PTK genes have been directly linked to tumorigenesis through somatic activating mutations (3–6), only a few PTP genes have been implicated in cancer (7–10). Moreover, it is not known how many or how frequently members of the PTP gene family are altered in any particular cancer type. We have systematically addressed these issues by comprehensive mutational analysis of the PTP gene superfamily in colorectal tumors.  The PTP gene superfamily is composed of three main families: (i) the classical PTPs, including the receptor PTPs (RPTPs) and the nonreceptor PTPs (NRPTPs); (ii) the dual specificity phosphatases (DSPs), which can dephosphorylate serine and threonine in addition to tyrosine residues; and (iii) the low molecular weight phosphatases (LMPs) (1). Using an approach similar to that described in a recent bioinformatic analysis of PTPs in the mouse genome (11), we employed a combination of Hidden Markov Models representing catalytic domains of members of the PTP superfamily to identify 53 classical PTPs (21 RPTPs and 32 NRPTPs), 33 DSPs, and one LMP in the human genome (12). This analysis revealed a set of genes representing all known human PTPs (13) as well as seven putative PTPs.  As an initial screen to evaluate whether these phosphatases are genetically altered in human cancer, we analyzed the coding exons of all 87 members of this gene superfamily in 18 colorectal cancers. A total of 1375 exons from all annotated RPTPs, NRPTPs, DSPs, and LMPs were extracted from genomic databases (12). These exons were amplified by polymerase chain reaction from cancer genomic DNA samples and directly sequenced with dye terminator chemistry (12). Whenever a presumptive mutation was identified, we attempted to determine whether it was somatically acquired (i.e., tumor specific) by examining the sequence of the gene in genomic DNA from normal tissue of the relevant patient.  From the 3.3 Mb of sequence information obtained, we identified six genes containing somatic mutations, including three members of the RPTP subfamily (PTPRF, PTPRG, and PTPRT) and three members of the NRPTP subfamily (PTPN3, PTPN13, and PTPN14). These six genes were then further analyzed for mutations in another 157 colorectal cancers. Through this strategy, we identified 77 mutations in the six genes, in aggregate affecting 26% of the colorectal tumors analyzed (table S1 and Fig. 1). Examination of these six genes in seven other tumor types identified PTPRT mutations in two of 11 (18%) lung cancers and two of 12 gastric cancers (17%), and PTPRF mutations in one of 11 (9%) lung cancers and one of 11 (9%) breast cancers. No mutations were identified in 12 pancreatic cancers, 12 ovarian cancers, 12 medulloblastomas, or 12 glioblastomas (table S1 and Fig. 1). In total, 83 nonsynonymous mutations were observed, all of which were somatic in the cancers that could be assessed (12).    Download high-res image  Open in new tab  Download Powerpoint Fig. 1. Distribution of mutations in PTPRT, PTPN13, PTPN14, PTPRG, PTPRF, and PTPN3. Black arrows indicate location of missense mutations, red arrows indicate location of nonsense mutations or frameshifts, and boxes represent functional domains (B41, band 41; CA, carbonic anhydrase; FN3, fibronectin type III; IG, immunoglobulin; MAM, meprin/A5/PTPμ; PDZ, postsynaptic density, discs large, zonula occludans; PTPc, catalytic phosphatase domain). Black stars indicate PTPRT mutants evaluated for phosphatase activity (Fig. 2), and the red star indicates PTPRT mutant evaluated for effects on cell proliferation (Fig. 3).  Fifteen of the 83 mutations were nonsense, frameshift, or splice-site alterations, all of which were predicted to result in aberrant or truncated proteins. In 16 tumors both alleles of the phosphatase gene appeared to be mutated, a characteristic often associated with tumor suppressor genes. The majority of tumors with PTP gene mutations also contained mutations in KRAS or BRAF, and nine tumors contained alterations in previously reported tyrosine kinase genes (table S1). Thus, the mutant phosphatases identified in this study are likely to operate through cellular pathways distinct from those associated with previously identified mutant kinases.  Analysis of mutations in tumors is complicated by the fact that mutations can arise either as functional alterations affecting key genes underlying the neoplastic process or as nonfunctional “passenger” changes. The multiple waves of clonal expansion and selection that occur throughout tumorigenesis lead to fixation of any mutation that had previously occurred in any predecessor cell, regardless of whether the mutation was actually responsible for the clonal expansion. Two independent lines of evidence suggest that the sequence alterations we observed are functional. First, the ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous mutations provides an indication of selection, as synonymous alterations usually do not exert a growth advantage. There were no somatic synonymous mutations detected in the colorectal cancers analyzed, resulting in a ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous mutations of 77 to 0, much higher than the expected 2:1 ratio for nonselected passenger mutations (P < 1 × 10–6). Second, the prevalence of mutations in the coding regions of the analyzed genes was ∼19 per Mb of tumor DNA, similar to the prevalence of functional somatic alterations observed in other gene families [e.g., the tyrosine kinome (6)] and significantly higher than the prevalence of nonfunctional alterations previously observed in the cancer genomes (∼1 per Mb, P < 0.01) (14). These data support the idea that these mutations were the targets of selection during tumorigenesis.  The great majority of the nonsense and frameshift mutations (Fig. 1) would result in polypeptides devoid of C-terminal phosphatase catalytic domains, thereby leading to inactivation of the phosphatase. To evaluate whether tumor-specific point mutations alter phosphatase activity, we biochemically tested mutant versions of PTPRT, the most frequently mutated PTP in the superfamily. Mutations in both intracellular PTP domains (D1 and D2) were evaluated. His-tagged versions of the catalytic region of wild-type PTPRT, two D1 mutants (Q987K and N1128I), and three D2 mutants (R1212W, R1346L, and T1368M) were produced in bacteria and analyzed for phosphatase activity by using 6,8-difluoro-4-methylumbelliferyl phosphate (DiFMUP) as a substrate (Fig. 2) (12). All D1 and D2 mutants had reduced phosphatase activity compared with the wild-type protein (Fig. 2). The kinetic parameter Kcat was reduced in both D1 mutants, while Km was increased in all three D2 mutants, suggesting that mutations in the two domains may have different effects on enzymatic activity. Although it has been thought that the D2 domain is usually catalytically inactive (1), our results are consistent with recent studies that show that the D2 domain is important for phosphatase activity in some receptor phosphatases (15).    Download high-res image  Open in new tab  Download Powerpoint Fig. 2. Evaluation of phosphatase activity of mutant PTPRT. (A) Saturation kinetics of wild-type and mutant PTPRT. His-tagged versions of PTPRT protein segments comprising the two catalytic domains containing wild-type (WT) and tumor-specific mutant sequences were expressed in bacteria and purified using nickelaffinity chromatography. Equal amounts of WT and mutant proteins were used to evaluate enzyme kinetics. The rate of hydrolysis of substrate (DiFMUP) is plotted against increasing substrate concentration. Data were fitted to the Michaelis-Menton equation, and the resulting kinetic parameters of WT and mutant proteins are indicated in (B).  These biochemical data on missense mutations, coupled with the large number of truncating mutations, suggested that PTPRT functions as a tumor suppressor gene. To determine whether PTPRT expression can inhibit tumor cell growth, we transfected wild-type PTPRT into HCT116 colorectal cancer cells (12). An identical expression vector containing an R632X mutant of PTPRT was used for comparison. Wild-type PTPRT potently inhibited cell growth in this assay, as seen by the substantial decrease in the number of neomycin-resistant colonies compared with the R632X mutant or with vector alone (Fig. 3, A and B). Similar results with wild-type and mutant PTPRT were also observed in DLD1 colorectal cancer cells.    Download high-res image  Open in new tab  Download Powerpoint Fig. 3. PTPRT overexpression suppresses growth of human cancer cells. (A) HCT116 colorectal cancer cells were transfected with wild-type (WT) PTPRT construct, truncated R632X mutant PTPRT construct, or empty pCI-Neo vector. The photographs show colonies stained with crystal violet after 14 days of geneticin selection. (B) Number of resistant colonies (mean of two 25 cm2 flasks) for WT PTPRT, mutant PTPRT, and empty vector.  The combination of these genetic, biochemical, and cellular data suggest that PTPRT and the other identified phosphatases are likely to act as tumor suppressors. This is consistent with the function of other phosphatases implicated in tumorigenesis (7, 8, 16) and with the general role of phosphatases in inhibiting various growth-promoting signaling pathways (2). The absence of biallelic mutations in a subset of the analyzed tumors suggests that some alterations may act in a dominant-negative fashion or may affect gene dosage, mechanisms that have been previously involved in inactivation of other tumor suppressor genes (17, 18).  Little is known about the functional role of the tyrosine phosphatases discussed here. PTPN13 appears to be involved in apoptosis (19) and may be partly responsible for the antitumor effects of tamoxifen (20). Overexpression of PTPN3 inhibits growth of NIH/3T3 cells, possibly through interaction with valosin-containing protein (VCP/p97) (21). PTPN14 and PTPRF are thought to play a role in cell adhesion by regulating tyrosine phosphorylation of adherens junction proteins (22, 23). Because increased phosphorylation of adherens junctions has been shown to increase cell motility and migration (22, 24), mutational inactivation of these genes may be an important step in cancer cell invasion and metastasis. PTPRG maps to chromosome 3p14.2, a region frequently lost in lung, renal, and early-stage breast tumors, and is thought to be a target of the translocation at 3p14 in familial renal cell carcinoma (25–27). However, no point mutations in PTPRG (28) or any of the other genes identified here have been previously described in any cancer. PTPRT is expressed in the developing central nervous system and in the adult cerebellum (29) and had not been thought to play a role in the growth or differentiation of other tissues. We have found that PTPRT is expressed in a variety of human tissues, including normal colon epithelium as well as cells derived from colorectal cancers (fig. S1).  Phosphatases affect signaling pathways that may be amenable to therapeutic intervention in cancer cells (2). Although reactivation of incapacitated phosphatases is likely to be pharmacologically challenging, identification of the corresponding kinases that phosphorylate substrates normally regulated by the mutant phosphatases could provide novel therapeutic targets. Like the analysis of genetic alterations in tyrosine kinases (6), the present study suggests the possibility of individualized therapy based on the mutant phosphatases present in specific tumors. Conceivably, this approach would have broad therapeutic use, because more than 50% of colorectal tumors analyzed to date have alterations in at least one member of the tyrosine phosphatome or kinome. Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase T (PTPRT/PTPρ) is frequently mutated in human cancers including colon, lung, gastric and skin cancers. More than half of the identified tumor-derived mutations are located in the extracellular part of PTPρ. However, the functional significance of those extracellular domain mutations remains to be defined. Here we report that the extracellular domain of PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation. This homophilic interaction is very specific, as PTPρ does not interact with its closest homolog PTPμ in a cell aggregation assay. We further demonstrated that all 5 tumor-derived mutations located in the N-terminal MAM and Ig domains impair, to varying extents, their ability to from cell aggregates, indicating that those mutations are loss-of-function mutations. Our results suggest that PTPρ may play an important role in cell-cell adhesion and mutational inactivation of this phosphatase could promote tumor migration and metastasis.  Go to: Introduction Tyrosine phosphorylation is coordinately controlled by protein tyrosine kinases and phosphatases and is a central feature of many signaling pathways involved in tumor development (1). While activating mutations in protein tyrosine kinases have been shown to play vital roles in tumorigenesis (1), the role of phosphatases is less well-defined. We recently identified PTPRT, also known as PTPρ, as the most frequently mutated PTP gene in colorectal cancers (CRCs) (2). PTPRT was also mutationally altered in lung, gastric cancers and melanomas (2). The spectrum of mutations, which included nonsense mutations and frameshifts, suggested that these mutations were inactivating (2). Biochemical analyses demonstrated that missense mutations in the catalytic domains of PTPρ diminished its phosphatase activity and overexpression of PTPρ inhibited CRC cell growth (2). Taken together, these studies strongly supported the notion that PTPρ normally acts as a tumor suppressor gene. This conclusion was also supported by a transposon-based somatic mutagenesis screen in mice, wherein PTPρ was isolated as a target gene from two different mouse transgenic sarcomas (3).  PTPRT (PTPρ) is a member of the type IIB receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase (RPTP) subfamily (4). Other members of this subfamily include PTPRM (PTPμ), PTPRK (PTPκ) and PCP2 (also called PTPλ, PTPψ, PTPRO-omicron, PTPπ, hPTP-J) (5). These 4 RPTPs share the same domain structure: an extracelluar domain, a juxtamembrane region and two phosphatase domains (6). The extracellular domains of type IIB RPTPs have high sequence identities (7, 8), all consist of a MAM (memprin/A5/PTPμ) domain, an Ig domain, and four fibronectin type III (FNIII) repeats (6). The MAM domain is suggested to play a role in protein dimerization (6). The Ig domain is a disulfide structure that is found in many cell surface proteins and has been shown to mediate homophilic and heterophilic interactions between cell adhesion molecules (6). The FNIII motif was originally identified in the extracellular matrix protein fibronectin and later found to be present in many immunoglobulin superfamily cell adhesion molecules (6). We have identified ~15 somatic mutations that are localized in the extracellular domain of PTPRT/PTPρ. How these mutations affect the functions of PTPρ remains to be determined.  Three close homologs of PTPρ, PTPμ, PTPκ and PTPλ (PCP-2), are known to mediate homophilic cell-cell adhesion (9– 12). Expression of the full-length PTPμ (9) (10) or a construct encoding the extracellular, transmembrane and 55 amino acids of the juxtamembrane domain of PTPμ in non-adhesive Sf9 insect cells induces cell aggregation (9). Furthermore, homophilic binding of PTPμ was demonstrated between PTPμ-coated fluorescent beads and cells that endogenously express PTPμ (9). The minimal region required for homophilic binding was mapped to the Ig domain of PTPμ (13). In addition, the Ig domain is required for proper cell surface localization (14). However, assays that test cell-cell aggregation demonstrate that the MAM and Ig domains as well as the first two fibronectin type III repeats are required for efficient cell-cell aggregation (15– 18). Similarly, PTPκ was also demonstrated to mediate homophilic cell-cell aggregation (11). Here we report that PTPRT (PTPρ), like its homologs, mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation in Sf9 cells. Most importantly, the tumor-derived mutations located in the MAM and Ig domains are defective in this cell-cell adhesion function.  Go to: Results The extracellular domain of PTPρ mediates cell-cell aggregation in Sf9 cells  To test whether PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell adhesion, we made the following PTPρ baculoviral constructs expressing: (1) full-length PTPρ; (2) the intracellular fragment of PTPρ (Intra); (3) the extracellular fragment of PTPρ with its transmembrane domain (Extra-TM); (4) the extracellular fragment of PTPρ with its transmembrane, juxtamembrane and wedge domains (Extra-JMD-W); (5) a chimera containing the extracellular and transmembrane domains of the EGF receptor and the intracellular PTP domains of PTPρ (Fig. 1A). All of those fragments were tagged with V5 epitope tags. Proteins of the expected size were expressed in Sf9 cells infected with those baculoviral constructs (Fig. 1B). All of these proteins, but the intracellular PTPρ, were expressed on the surface on Sf9 cells (Fig. 1C). To test whether these PTPρ recombinant proteins mediate cell-cell adhesion, a cell aggregation assay was performed following the procedure of Brady-Kalnay et al (9). Sf9 cells infected with a baculovirus encoding PTPμ, which was previously demonstrated to mediate cell-cell aggregation, were treated in parallel as a positive control (Fig. 2). As shown in Fig 2, the non-adhesive Sf9 cells expressing either the full-length PTPρ or PTPρ-JMD-W formed cell aggregates. On the contrary, Sf9 cells expressing either the intracellular fragments of PTPρ or the EGFR/PTPρ chimeras remained as a suspension of single cells (Fig 1C). These results indicate that the extracullar fragment of PTPρ play an important role in mediating cell-cell aggregation and the phosphatase activity of PTPρ is not required for this function. Surprisingly, although the construct that encodes the PTPρ extracellular fragment with the transmembrane domain sequences only (Extra-TM) was expressed on the cell surface (see Figure 7), this protein failed to mediate cell aggregation of Sf9 cells, suggesting that additional juxtamembrane sequences are required for either forming or stablizing the cell aggregates.  Figure 1 Figure 1 Expression of PTPρ constructs in Sf9 cells Figure 2 Figure 2 PTPρ mediates cell-cell aggregation Figure 7 Figure 7 Cell Surface Protein expression of PTPμ and the PTPρ mutant proteins PTPρ mediates highly specific homophilic cell-cell aggregation  To test whether PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation, one set of Sf9 cells were infected with virus expressing enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) and another set of Sf9 cells were co-infected with viruses expressing either the full-length PTPρ or red fluorescent protein (RFP). The GFP expressing cells were mixed with equal number cells expressing full-length PTPρ (co-expressing RFP) and the aggregation assays were performed. As shown in Fig 3A, the GFP labeled cells did not aggregate and did not contribute to the aggregates formed by cells expressing full-length PTPρ (RFP). These results strongly suggest that the aggregation of Sf9 cells expressing PTPρ is mediated through a homophilic interaction among PTPρ molecules in trans, but not through a heterophilic interaction between molecules expressed on the surface of Sf9 cells. Interestingly, the homophilic interaction of PTPρ is very specific. Although 63% of the amino acid sequences of the extracellular domain of PTPρ are identical with that of PTPRM (PTPμ), Sf9 cells expressing PTPρ (co-expressing RFP) did not aggregate with PTPμ expressing cells (co-expressing GFP) as shown in Fig. 3B.  Figure 3 Figure 3 PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation The tumor-derived PTPRT/PTPρ mutations in the MAM and Ig domains are defective in cell-cell aggregation  Several studies demonstrated that the MAM and Ig domains as well as the first two FNIII repeats of PTPμ are the minimal essential regions required for its homophilic interaction (13, 15, 17, 18). We identified 5 tumor-specific mutations that are located in the two domains (2). Among these five mutations, the F74S mutation is located in the MAM domain and the other four mutations (A209T, K218T, F248S and Y280H) are located in the Ig domain (Fig. 4A). To test whether these mutations affect their ability to mediate cell-cell aggregation in Sf9 cells, we engineered the five mutations by site-directed mutagenesis using the full-length PTPρ baculoviral construct as the template. The five mutant proteins are expressed at the expected size and at similar levels to wild-type PTPρ on a western blot (Fig. 4B), indicating that these mutations do not affect their protein stability. None of these mutations significantly alter their cell surface expression, as all five mutant PTPρ proteins showed strong plasma membrane staining (Fig. 4C and Fig. 7). However, as shown in Fig. 5, all mutant PTPρ proteins formed smaller aggregates than that of the wild-type PTPρ protein. To quantify the cells aggregates, percentage of cells that are incorporate into > 5-cell clusters were counted (as described in the material and methods section). As shown in Fig. 5, Sf9 cells expressing all the mutants formed significantly less aggregates than that of cells expressing wild-type PTPρ. The deletion construct of PTPρ lacking the two phosphatase domains (PTPρ Extra-JMD-W) and the K218T mutant exhibited similar levels of aggregation that were statistically less than wild-type PTPρ (p < 0.01). Taken together, our data demonstrated that the five tumor-derived mutations located the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ are deficient in cell-cell adhesion. Therefore, these mutations exhibit varying degrees of loss-of-function in cell adhesion.  Figure 4 Figure 4 Expression of tumor-derived PTPρ mutants in Sf9 cells Figure 5 Figure 5 Tumor-derived mutations of PTPρ are defective in cell-cell aggregation Mechanistically, the defect of the PTPρ mutations in cell-cell adhesion could be resulted from either impaired ability in homophilic binding or reduced cell surface expression. Although immunofluorescent staining indicated that those mutations do not alter cell surface expression qualitatively, it is imperative to quantify cell surface expression of mutant PTPρ proteins. As described in detail in the method section, baculovirus-infected Sf9 cell surface proteins were labeled with Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin and isolated on immobilized NeutrAvidin Gel. Western blots were performed with antibodies to PTPμ (SK18) or the V5 tag. The SK18 antibody recognizes the cytoplasmic domain of both PTPμ and PTPρ. The results shown in Fig. 7 demonstrate that full length PTPμ and the wild-type, mutant and deleted PTPρ proteins were expressed at the cell surface. As a control for a non-cell surface protein, the cytoplasmic intracellular domain of PTPμ (PTPμ-intra) was expressed that is detected by SK18 (9). PTPμ intra does not contain an extracellular domain and therefore is not biotinylated nor precipitated by the NeutrAvidin gel (Fig. 7). Quantitatively, the levels of cell surface expression of the 5 tumor-derived PTPρ mutations were similar to that of wild-type protein. If the cell surface expression level (CSE value) of wild-type PTPρ is arbitrarily assigned as 1, the CSE values of F74S, A209T, K218T, F248S and Y280H mutations were 2.3, 1.1, 1.6, 0.6 and 0.8 respectively. Interestingly, some PTPρ mutants that contain the extracellular domain but are unable to mediate cell-cell aggregation are expressed at higher levels on the Sf9 cell surface than wild-type PTPρ. These results suggest that defect of PTPρ mutation in cell-cell adhesion is mainly due to reduced homophilic binding affinity of the mutant proteins. Interestingly, the cell surface expression levels PTPρ Extra-TM (CSE value = 27) and PTPρ Extra-JMD-W (CSE value = 20) were much higher than that of full-length protein for unknown reasons.  Go to: Discussion We demonstrated that PTPRT/PTPρ meditates homophilic cell-cell aggregation and five tumor-derived mutations located in the MAM and Ig domains impair this function. Our results strongly suggest that those PTPρ loss-of-function mutations are selected for during the process of tumor development; therefore, these mutations should play a causal role in tumorigenesis. We chose to examine whether the MAM and Ig domain mutations are deficient in cell aggregation, because previous studies indicated that these two domains of PTPμ, a close homolog of PTPρ, are required for its cell-cell aggregation function (13, 15, 17). Recently, the crystal structure of the N-terminal MAM and Ig domains of PTPμ was determined at 2.7 Å resolution (17, 18). Five tumor-derived mutations of PTPρ are located in the two domains and all of them can be mapped to equivalent residues in the MAM and Ig domain structure of PTPμ. Based on the crystal structure, the authors predicted that 4 of them (F74S, A209T, F248S and Y280H) would cause significant perturbation of the structure of PTPRT, because these mutations dramatically alter the character of buried side-chains (17). Moreover, the fifth mutation K218T is located on the surface of the Ig domain and the authors predicted that this mutation would directly alter protein-protein interactions (17). Our data indicated that the K218T mutation affects the size of aggregates and only a small effect on the percentage of cells incorporated into the aggregates, suggesting that the K218T mutant may decrease the binding affinity of PTPρ. Interestingly, the other four mutations significantly reduce the percentage of aggregation, therefore, these data suggest that the F74S, A209T, F248S and Y280H mutations dramatically alter the domain structure and lead to perturbation of the homophilic interaction of PTPρ. Our previous studies showed that the tumor-derived phosphatase domain mutations of PTPρ diminish its phosphatase activity and overexpression of PTPρ suppresses the growth of colorectal cancer cells, indicating that PTPρ normally act as a tumor suppressor (2). The loss-of-function nature of these five extracellular mutations provides further supportive evidence to this notion.  The finding that PTPρ mediates homophilic cell aggregation of non-adhesive insect Sf9 cells suggests that this protein could be involved in cell-cell adhesion in human epithelial cells where it is endogenously expressed. The type IIB RPTP subfamily consists of PTPμ, PTPκ, PTPρ and PCP-2. It has been shown that PTPμ, PTPκ and PTPλ (PCP-2), mediate homophilic cell-cell adhesion (9–12). Interestingly, the homophilic interaction of these RPTPs seems to be highly specific, because we and others showed that neither PTPρ nor PTPκ (15) interact with PTPμ. It is worth noting that the juxtamembrane domain of PTPρ may be necessary for its cell adhesion function. As shown in Figure 2, Sf9 cells expressing the extracellular and juxtamembrane domains of PTPρ, but not cells expressing the extracellular and transmembrane portion of the protein (PTPρ Extra-TM), formed cell aggregates, although both proteins were expressed on the cell surface (Fig. 7). Expression of a construct encoding the extracellular, transmembrane and only 55 amino acids of the juxtamembrane domain of PTPμ in non-adhesive Sf9 insect cells induced cell aggregation (9). It is possible that cis interactions between the membrane proximal juxtamembrane domains are required for initiating, stabilizing or maintaining cell-cell adhesion. Interestingly, there are two PTPRT mutations (K788E and R790I) located in the juxtamembrane domain that are found in lung cancers (1). Moreover, Besco et al. showed that PTPρ interacts with cell adhesion molecules including E-cadherin, α, β, and γ-catenin, and α;-actinin (19). PTPμ also binds the cadherin-catenin complex (7, 20–22). Loss of cell-cell adhesion, such as genetic and epigenetic inactivation of cell adhesion molecule E-cadherin, is thought to be a prerequisite for carcinoma invasion and metastasis (23). Therefore, mutational inactivation of the cell adhesion function PTPρ may also play a critical role in tumor migration and metastasis.
59||Most cancers are characterized by increased STAT3 activation where phosphorylated STAT3 levels are associated with reduced survival. The molecular mechanisms underlying aberrant STAT3 phosphorylation/activation in human malignancies have been elusive. Our findings provide a mechanistic basis for tumor-specific STAT3 hyperactivation in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). We demonstrate that receptor-like protein tyrosine phosphatases, encoded by PTPR genes, including PTPRT, are commonly mutated in HNSCC where PTPR mutations are associated with increased phosphorylation of STAT3 in tumors. Several cancer-related PTPRT mutations localize to the substrate interaction surface of the enzyme catalytic domains. Expression of mutated PTPRT in HNSCC models markedly increases STAT3 activation, promoting cellular survival. PTPRT mutations may therefore serve as predictive biomarkers for STAT3 pathway inhibitors, suggesting new therapeutic opportunities.  Keywords: STAT3 activation, driver mutations, phosphatase mutations Go to: ABSTRACT The underpinnings of STAT3 hyperphosphorylation resulting in enhanced signaling and cancer progression are incompletely understood. Loss-of-function mutations of enzymes that dephosphorylate STAT3, such as receptor protein tyrosine phosphatases, which are encoded by the PTPR gene family, represent a plausible mechanism of STAT3 hyperactivation. We analyzed whole exome sequencing (n = 374) and reverse-phase protein array data (n = 212) from head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs). PTPR mutations are most common and are associated with significantly increased phospho-STAT3 expression in HNSCC tumors. Expression of receptor-like protein tyrosine phosphatase T (PTPRT) mutant proteins induces STAT3 phosphorylation and cell survival, consistent with a “driver” phenotype. Computational modeling reveals functional consequences of PTPRT mutations on phospho-tyrosine–substrate interactions. A high mutation rate (30%) of PTPRs was found in HNSCC and 14 other solid tumors, suggesting that PTPR alterations, in particular PTPRT mutations, may define a subset of patients where STAT3 pathway inhibitors hold particular promise as effective therapeutic agents.  Tyrosine phosphorylation regulates a multitude of cellular processes by coordinately activating and inactivating signaling proteins. Aberrations of protein tyrosine phosphorylation and signaling are a hallmark for oncogenic events found in most human cancers. The phosphorylation/dephosphorylation of tyrosine residues on signaling proteins is directly mediated by protein tyrosine kinases and phosphatases. Although many cellular factors are known to dynamically control the activity of these enzymes, genetic alterations of kinases and phosphatases in human cancers lead to perturbations in the levels of tyrosine phosphorylated proteins, uncontrolled cell growth, and tumor formation. Although activating mutations of tyrosine kinases have been extensively studied (1, 2), cancer-associated mutations of tyrosine phosphatases remain incompletely understood, partly due to the lack of comprehensive genomic analysis of these large arrays of phosphatases, as well as their largely unknown and often ambiguous actions in normal physiology and cancer biology.  Among the 107 known protein tyrosine phosphatases, the receptor protein tyrosine phosphatases (RPTPs) represent the largest family of the human tyrosine phosphatome, comprising 21 family members (3). These RPTPs are believed to be crucial for the regulation of inter- as well as intracellular signaling due to the cell-surface localization of RPTPs. Selected members of the RPTP family have been reported to function as tumor suppressors, where gene mutation, deletion, or methylation may contribute to the cancer phenotype (3).  STAT3 is an oncogene, and constitutive STAT3 activation is a hallmark of human cancers. Activating STAT3 mutations are rare in all cancers studied to date, including head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) (4). Although activating mutations of upstream receptor tyrosine kinases leading to increased STAT3 phosphorylation characterize some malignancies [e.g., EGFR mutations in non-small cell lung cancer (5)], most cancers lack these alterations yet harbor elevated phospho-STAT3 (p-STAT3) levels. We (Z.W.) previously reported that STAT3 serves as a substrate for wild-type PTPRT enzyme (also known as RPTP-T, RPTPρ, or RPTPrho) in colorectal cancer cells (SW480 and HT29) and HEK293T cells (6). STAT3 has additionally been reported to be a substrate of PTPRD (also known as PTPδ) in glioblastoma models, suggesting that several RPTP family members may exhibit tumor-suppressive function by dephosphorylating STAT3 (7). In the present study, we hypothesized that mutation of RPTP family members, including PTPRT, results in elevated expression levels of tyrosine phosphorylated STAT3 in human HNSCC. Analysis of reverse-phase protein array and sequencing data demonstrated significant association between PTPR mutation and increased p-STAT3 expression levels in HNSCC, establishing the de novo signaling consequence of PTPR mutations on a major oncogenic pathway that drives human carcinogenesis. Studies in HNSCC models demonstrate that PTPRT mutations induce p-STAT3 and HNSCC survival, consistent with a “driver” phenotype whereas computational modeling revealed functional implications of PTPR mutations on phospho-tyrosine (p-Tyr)–substrate interactions. Analysis of whole-exome sequencing results of 374 primary head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs) revealed that PTPR genes are mutated in nearly one-third (30.7%) of HNSCC tumors, compared with a 15.2% mutation rate in the cytoplasmic protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) family. This pattern is strikingly consistent across an additional 14 types of solid tumors sequenced to date, implicating a potentially important pathologic contribution of PTPR mutations to human carcinogenesis. These cumulative findings suggest that genetic alterations of selected PTPRs, including PTPRT, may induce STAT3 activation and serve as predictive biomarkers for treatment with emerging STAT3 pathway inhibitors.  Go to: RESULTS PTPR Mutations Significantly Correlate with in Situ p-STAT3(Y705) Up-Regulation in HNSCC Patient Tumors. To date, associations between PTPR alterations and human cancers have relied on cell-line models. It remains undetermined whether tumor-specific mutations of these key tyrosine phosphatases mediate STAT3 hyperactivation in human tumors, including HNSCC. Using reverse phase protein array (RPPA), we conducted an integrative proteomic-genomic analysis on HNSCC patient tumors. We sought to determine whether PTPR mutation is correlated with altered STAT3(Y705) phosphorylation in primary HNSCC tumor specimens. Strikingly, examination of 212 HNSCC primary tumors showed that tumors harboring mutations in PTPR tumor suppressor genes (including PTPRD/J/K/M/O/S/T) (3) expressed significantly higher levels of p-STAT3(Y705) compared with tumors with wild-type PTPR family members (P = 0.02) (Fig. 1A). These results provide evidence of a direct association between PTPR mutation and elevated STAT3 phosphorylation/activation in human tumors in situ and establish a plausible mechanism for STAT3 hyperactivation in human cancers. In contrast, we observed no correlation between p-STAT3(Y705) expression and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), p-EGFR(Y1068), p-EGFR(Y1173), suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS), Src, or interleukin 6 (IL6) expression. Additionally, HNSCC tumors harboring multiple PTPR mutations exhibited an even greater increase in p-STAT3(Y705) expression although the number of tumors in these groups is insufficient for statistical analysis (n = 14, 2, 1, or 1, for tumors with 2, 3, 4, or 5 PTPR mutations per tumor, respectively). Upregulation of p-STAT3(Y705) was further confirmed by immunohistochemistry in HNSCC tumors harboring PTPR mutations (Fig. S1) and in HNSCC cell lines harboring endogenous PTPR mutations (Fig. S2).  Fig. 1. Fig. 1. PTPR mutations correlate with STAT3 tyrosine phosphorylation in HNSCC tumors and enhance survival and STAT3 phosphorylation in HNSCC cells. (A) Significant increase in p-STAT3(Y705) expression (intensity plot in log2 scale; protein array data from The ... PTPRT Mutations “Drive” HNSCC Cell Survival and STAT3 Activation. The biologic/functional consequences of tumor-derived PTPR mutations in HNSCC are unknown. To determine whether HNSCC PTPRT mutations act as “drivers,” we developed a serum-dependent HNSCC cell line (PCI-52-SD1) that undergoes rapid cell death in the absence of serum. Using this model, stable expression of two representative mutants (calculated to result in both charge and amino acid size changes) (Table S1), PTPRT(A1022E) and PTPRT(R1040L), conferred increased survival (3.2- and 6.2-fold, respectively) compared with expression of empty vector control, confirming a driver phenotype for these PTPRT mutants in HNSCC cells (Fig. 1B).  To investigate the mechanism responsible for the driver phenotype of the PTPRT mutants, we tested the hypothesis that PTPRT mutations identified in HNSCC may impair the phosphatase activity of the enzyme, resulting in increased phosphorylation of PTPRT substrates, including the oncogenic transcription factor STAT3. Stable expression of wild-type PTPRT in PCI-52-SD1 cells resulted in reduction of basal p-STAT3 levels by ∼48% (P = 0.0014) (Fig. 1C), demonstrating that wild-type PTPRT can modulate STAT3 activation in HNSCC cells. On the other hand, expression of a PTPRT protein harboring a mutation (A1022E) in the catalytic domain promoted up-regulation of the p-STAT3 protein in an HNSCC cell line with low basal levels of p-STAT3 (CAL-33) (Fig. 1D). Similar effects were observed in HEK293 cells upon transient expression of a PTPRT mutant (Fig. S3). Interestingly, expression of a PTPRT protein with a mutation (P497T) in the extracellular fibronectin type III-like domain did not alter the phosphorylation status of STAT3 (Fig. 1D), suggesting that mutations outside the catalytic domains may have other mechanisms of action. In addition, expression of wild-type PTPRT in EGFR-knockout mouse embryonic fibroblasts resulted in decreased expression of p-STAT3(Y705), suggesting that PTPRT catalytic activity is independent of EGFR expression/activity (Fig. S4).  Computational Modeling of PTPRT Mutations in the Substrate Binding Sites Reveals Plausible Functional Alterations of Phosphatase Activity. Given that a high percentage of PTPRT mutations are located within the enzymatic (PTPase) domain, we sought to determine the potential impact of these mutations on interactions between the catalytic domains and phospho-tyrosine substrate using a molecular modeling approach. Although the structure of a PTPRT–p-Tyr protein complex is not available, the X-ray crystallographic structure of the PTPRT phosphatase domain alone has been reported (PDB ID code 2OOQ) (8). Therefore, we determined by homology modeling (9), the approximate substrate-interacting surface of the PTPRT PTPase domains 1 and 2 (Fig. 2 A–D) based on the highly similar (to PTPRT) crystal structure of human tyrosine phosphatase PTPN5 in complex with p-Tyr (detailed in Materials and Methods). Using this model, we localized several cancer-related PTPRT mutation sites to the substrate-interaction surface of the PTPRT PTPase domains 1 and 2 in close proximity to incorporated p-Tyr (D905, R928, H1053, G1089, and V1124 in domain 1; Q1180, R1201, R1207, P1213, Q1286, T1346, N1380, G1382, and R1384 in domain 2). Mutation sites previously shown to decrease the PTPRT phosphatase activity were also found in proximity to p-Tyr regions (C1084, D1052, Y893, Q965, R1188, and T1346) (10, 11). These results suggest that PTPRT PTPase domain mutations, which are found in human cancers, likely interfere with enzymatic activity and/or substrate interactions. Of note, in addition to the reported missense mutations of the PTPRT PTPase domains, many nonsense mutations (mutation to a stop codon) and frameshift mutations are highly likely to alter PTPRT structure and stability, as well as impacting substrate interactions (L362fs, R617fs, Q434*, and Q615* found in HNSCC, and E1227*, R1207*, E1155*, R1358*, and G1386* in other cancers; COSMIC database).  Fig. 2. Fig. 2. Computational modeling of PTPRT PTPase domain in complex with a phospho-tyrosine substrate. (A) PTPRT PTPase domain 1 in complex with phospho-tyrosine (p-Tyr, green) of substrate (e.g., p-STAT3). The surface involved in the interaction with partner (p-Tyr-containing) ... PTPR Genes Are Mutated in Nearly One-Third of HNSCC Tumors, and PTPRT Is the Most Frequently Mutated PTPR. PTPRT belongs to the receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase family, which comprises 21 members, and no genomic study to date has examined the mutational profile of the entire family in a large number of human tumor specimens. To understand the potential genetic contributions of the PTPR family (in addition to PTPRT) to tyrosine signaling/regulation in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), we comprehensively analyzed PTPR family mutations in large cohorts of primary HNSCC tumors. Whole-exome sequencing data of 374 primary HNSCCs were included [from 300 TCGA HNSCC tumors and 74 HNSCCs previously published (12)]. Strikingly, 30.7% (115/374) of HNSCC tumors harbored nonsynonymous somatic mutations of at least one PTPR family member, compared with only 15.2% (57/374) of tumors with mutations of cytoplasmic PTP genes, the second major family of PTPs (Fig. 3A). Further, 7.8% (29/374) of HNSCC tumors contained multiple mutations of PTPR family members (from two to six PTPR mutations/tumor) (Fig. 3B) (Table S2 contains all PTPR mutations found in HNSCC). Further investigation demonstrated that this high rate of somatic mutation of the PTPR family (vs. cytoplasmic PTPs) found in HNSCC is also detected in all 14 types of human solid tumors sequenced to date by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) (4,039 total solid tumors sequenced), but not in a hematopoietic malignancy (6/196 AML cases; 3.1%) (Fig. 3C and Table S3), implicating a likely pathologic involvement of PTPR mutations in HNSCC, as well as other solid human tumors.  Fig. 3. Fig. 3. Whole-exome sequencing of human cancers demonstrates high rates of PTPR somatic mutations. (A) Frequencies of PTPR (the receptor subtype) and cytoplasmic PTP somatic mutations in 374 HNSCC tumors. (B) A subset (29/374, 7.8%) of HNSCC tumors harbor mutations ... Human papilloma virus (HPV) infection is a known etiologic factor in a subset of HNSCC and is capable of disrupting genome stability. Thus, we examined whether HPV was associated with the high rate of PTPR mutations in HNSCC. Statistical analysis showed no correlation between PTPR mutation and HPV status (P = 0.31; PTPR mutations in 11/48 HPV-positive tumors vs. 93/299 HPV-negative tumors), indicating that HPV is not a contributing factor to PTPR mutations in HNSCC. Further analysis showed that PTPR mutations were not associated with mutations of TP53 (P = 0.81), NOTCH1 (P = 0.24), PIK3CA (P = 0.47), or HRAS (P = 0.77) in HNSCC, indicating that PTPR mutations are independent of these known common mutational events in HNSCC tumors (12).  The availability of comprehensive whole-exome sequencing data (from TCGA) on all PTPR genes allowed us to identify the most commonly mutated PTPRs in all sequenced human cancers, including HNSCC. Among the 374 sequenced HNSCC tumors, PTPRT is the most frequently mutated PTPR (5.6% cases; 22 mutations total, with one tumor harboring 2 PTPRT mutations), followed by PTPRC, PTPRD, and PTPRM (Table S2). Although PTPR mutation rates vary among different cancer types, cumulative results reveal that PTPRT is the single most commonly mutated PTPR in human cancers (6.2%, 285 mutations in 4,609 solid and hematopoietic cancers sequenced) (Table S3), with the highest mutation frequency of PTPRT in cutaneous melanoma (a total of 99 mutations in 253 tumors sequenced; 39.1%).  The sites of the most frequently mutated PTPR members (PTPRT/C/D/M) in HNSCC are shown in Fig. 3D (all other HNSCC-associated PTPR mutations are shown in Fig. S5). Cumulative mutation data for PTPRT in 16 types of sequenced tumors indicate that 37.9% (108/285) of PTPRT mutations are found in the catalytic phosphatase (PTPase) domain whereas 33.0% (94/285) occur in the extracellular fibronectin type III-like (FN3) domain. In HNSCC, 45.5% (10/22) of PTPRT mutations are located in the PTPase domain (Fig. 3D), indicating the pathologic relevance of these genetic alterations of the phosphatase activity, which lead to pSTAT3 up-regulation in HNSCC tumors.  Go to: DISCUSSION These cumulative results indicate that selected tumor-associated PTPRT mutations can alter STAT3 phosphorylation/activation. Our findings suggest a previously undescribed, and potentially common, mechanism for dysregulated cell survival and growth involving PTPR mutation and STAT3 hyperactivation. Therefore, tumors that harbor PTPR (including PTPRT) mutations may be amenable to treatment with STAT3 pathway inhibitors. The frequency of PTPR mutations is unexpectedly high across all solid tumor types analyzed to date. The dispersed distribution and lack of hotspot mutations in PTPR genes suggest that these mutations likely represent loss-of-function events affecting tumor suppressive proteins rather than gain-of-function of oncogenic proteins in cancer. Although this mutation pattern is consistent with that reported for select PTPRs in colorectal cancers (10), this study represents a comprehensive analysis of somatic mutations of the entire PTPR family across all human cancers sequenced to date.  Constitutive STAT3 activation is frequently found in nearly all human cancers, and expression levels of p-STAT3(Y705) are often associated with poor prognosis (13–15). Mechanisms driving STAT3 activation in cancer are incompletely understood. Direct sequencing of thousands of patient tumors by TCGA has not identified common or consistent STAT3 mutational events in solid tumors. Furthermore, solid tumors, including HNSCC, exhibit a lack of activating mutations in kinases upstream of STAT3 (4). Thus, activating mutations of STAT3, or of direct upstream positive regulators, are unlikely to be the key genetic factors driving STAT3 hyperactivation in human cancers. PTPRT has been reported to be a negative regulator of STAT3 (6). Our integrative genomic-proteomic findings establish that PTPRT mutations are important genetic events that drive in situ up-regulation of p-STAT3(Y705) within patient tumors. This reveals the driver role of genetic mutations in a negative regulator(s) of STAT3, an important oncogenic signaling protein in human cancer. PTPRT has been previously shown to be a tumor suppressor (in colon cancer cell line models), consistent with our present findings (16). Our results suggest that loss-of-function mutations in tumor suppressor tyrosine phosphatases may not only serve as permissive factors for oncogenesis as previously demonstrated, but can also act as direct drivers for cancer cell growth via dysregulation of substrate tyrosine phosphorylation.  Studies of PTPRT, in particular, showed that PTPRT has a discretely defined set of substrates, including STAT3 and paxillin. In our current study, the correlation between paxillin phosphorylation and PTPRT mutations was not examined, as anti–phospho-paxillin antibody has not been validated for our protein array platform. However, it is possible that paxillin signaling may also be affected by PTPRT mutations in the human tumors.  Computational modeling allows us to predict the potential effects of PTPase domain mutations (located intracellularly) in PTPRT, which may be applicable to other RPTP proteins. However, there are no existing computational methodologies to reliably predict the effects of the extracellular domain mutations (such as the FN3 domain mutations) found in these proteins. The broad existence of these extracellular domain mutations in the RPTP family will require systematic functional validation of each mutation in relevant cell models, as we have previously shown that some of these mutations could alter cell–cell adhesion, and thereby promote tumor cell migration (17).  The present study demonstrates that wild-type PTPRT promotes down-regulation of p-STAT3(Y705) in HNSCC and that somatic PTPRT mutations may represent “driving” events in cancer. We identify that somatic PTPR mutations, including PTPRT mutations, are associated with elevated p-STAT3(Y705) in human HNSCC. Other RPTP family members, especially PTPRD, may play similar roles in HNSCC and other solid tumors, where somatic mutation may lead to loss-of-function and subsequent activation of oncogenic pathways. Indeed, several commonly mutated PTPRs have been implicated as tumor suppressors, including PTPRD (18), PTPRF (10), PTPRG (10, 19), PTPRJ (20), and PTPRS (21).  In conclusion, PTPR mutational events are relatively common in primary HNSCC, as well as in many other solid tumors as revealed by large-scale whole-exome sequencing studies. We demonstrate that tumor-specific mutational events in the PTPRT gene can serve as direct drivers for tumor growth by inducing hyperactivation of STAT3, a potent oncogenic transcription factor and PTPRT substrate. STAT3 pathway inhibitors are under active investigation in human cancers and include transcription factor decoys, disruptors of recruitment of STAT3 to the IL6/IL6Ralpha/gp130 complex, and upstream kinase inhibitors, primarily Janus kinase inhibitors (22, 23). It is biologically plausible that selected PTPR mutations may identify tumors that may be particularly responsive to treatment with STAT3 pathway inhibitors.
60||The receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase T (PTPRT/PTPρ) is the most frequently mutated tyrosine phosphatase in human cancer. PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation. In its extracellular region, PTPρ has cell adhesion molecule-like motifs, including a MAM domain, an immunoglobulin domain and four fibronectin type III (FNIII) repeats. Tumor-derived mutations have been identified in all of these extracellular domains. Previously, we determined that tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and immunoglobulin domains of PTPρ reduce homophilic cell-cell aggregation. In this manuscript, we describe experiments in which we evaluated the contribution of the FNIII repeats to PTPρ-mediated cell-cell adhesion. Our results demonstrate that deletion of the FNIII repeats of PTPρ result in defective cell-cell aggregation. Furthermore, all of the tumor-derived mutations in the FNIII repeats of PTPρ also disrupt cell-cell aggregation. These results further support the hypothesis that mutational inactivation of PTPρ may lead to cancer progression by disrupting cell-cell adhesion.  Keywords: Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase, PTPRT, PTPρ, fibronectin type III repeat, cell-cell aggregation, cell-cell adhesion Go to: 1. Introduction Cancer progression and metastasis is in part influenced by changes in cell adhesion and tyrosine phosphorylation mediated by cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) (Paschos et al. 2009; Wheelock et al. 2008), as well as tyrosine kinases and tyrosine phosphatases, respectively (Freiss and Vignon 2004; Ostman et al. 2006). Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatases (RPTPs) comprise a family of proteins that have extracellular CAM domains coupled to cytoplasmic tyrosine phosphatase domains, and thus can impact cancer progression by regulating both cell adhesion and tyrosine phosphorylation (Brady-Kalnay 2001; Ostman et al. 2006).  The type IIB PTPμ-like subfamily of RPTPs includes PTPμ, PTPρ, PTPκ, and PCP-2 (PTPλ) (Aricescu et al. 2008; Brady-Kalnay 2001). The extracellular segment of the PTPμ-like RPTPs contain motifs found in CAMs, including a MAM domain, an immunoglobulin (Ig) domain and four fibronectin type III (FNIII) repeats (Aricescu et al. 2008; Brady-Kalnay 2001; Ostman et al. 2006). PTPμ subfamily members bind homophilically (i.e. the “ligand” for PTPμ is an identical PTPμ molecule on an adjacent cell) (Brady-Kalnay et al. 1993; Cheng et al. 1997; Gebbink et al. 1993; Sap et al. 1994; Yu et al. 2008; Zondag et al. 1995). The Ig domain of PTPμ is responsible for promoting homophilic interactions (Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994), and proper cell surface localization (Del Vecchio and Tonks 2005). However, both the MAM and Ig domains as well as the first two FNIII repeats are required for efficient cell-cell adhesion of PTPμ (Aricescu et al. 2006; Aricescu et al. 2007; Aricescu et al. 2008; Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Cismasiu et al. 2004; Zondag et al. 1995). PTPρ and PTPκ also mediate homophilic cell-cell adhesion (Sap et al. 1994; Yu et al. 2008). However, PCP2 has not yet been demonstrated to mediate cell-cell adhesion or aggregation although in vitro binding studies indicate it can bind homophilically (Cheng et al. 1997).  All type IIB RPTPs are potential tumor suppressor genes (Burgoyne et al. 2009a; Flavell et al. 2008; McArdle et al. 2001; Yan et al. 2006). Notably, PTPρ is the most frequently mutated phosphatase gene in human cancers including colon, lung, skin and stomach cancers (Forbes et al. 2008; Wang et al. 2004). Defective adhesion mediated by PTPρ may be at least one mechanism of cancer progression. In fact, cancer derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ are defective in mediating cell-cell aggregation (Yu et al. 2008).  In addition to the tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ previously described (Wang et al. 2004; Yu et al. 2008), the majority of extracellular domain mutations are located in the FNIII repeats of PTPρ (Wang et al. 2004). Given the importance of FNIII repeats in PTPμ-mediated adhesion and aggregation (Aricescu et al. 2007), we tested the contribution of the FNIII repeats of PTPρ to PTPρ-mediated adhesion. We determined that deletion constructs where each of the extracellular domains of PTPρ is removed, including the FNIII repeats, are defective in mediating cell-cell aggregation of Sf9 cells. Furthermore, when we engineered the cancer-derived mutations in the FNIII repeats of these PTPρ mutant proteins, they also result in defective cell-cell aggregation. These results demonstrate the importance of the FNIII repeats in contributing to proper cell-cell adhesion and suggest that adhesion mediated by PTPρ is likely important for the tumor suppressor activity of PTPρ.  Go to: 2. Materials and methods 2.1 Baculovirus generation  Baculoviruses were generated by transfecting cells with the BaculoGold™ Linearized Baculovirus DNA (BD Biosciences, San Diego, CA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The baculovirus for wild-type PTPρ was previously described (Yu et al. 2008).  2.2 Sf9 cell culture  Insect Sf9 cells from (BD Biosciences) were maintained at 27°C in Graces Insect Medium (BD Biosciences). The medium was supplemented with 10% FBS from (Hyclone, Logan, UT) and Gentamicin (MP Biomedicals, Solon, OH). Viruses were added to Sf9 cell medium to induce the expression of proteins of interest. Cells were harvested 30 hours post-infection for further analysis.  2.3 Generation of PTPRT deletion constructs  The PTPρ-ΔMAM, PTPρ-ΔIg, PTPρ-ΔFNIII-1, PTPρ-ΔFNIII-2, PTPρ-ΔFNIII-3 and PTPρ-ΔFNIII-4 constructs were generated by fusion PCR using the full-length PTPRT pVL1393-V5-His vector as the template. The primers 5’-GAAGATCTATGGCGAGCCTCGCCGCG-3’ and 5’-CCGGAATTCGGATCCTGGGGCGCTCTGAGCCCGGG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔMAM construct; the primers 5’-GCGTGGGAGGCTCTCTGCATGGATGAGCAAGGAC-3’ and 5’-CAATGGGTCTTGCTCATCCATGCAGAGAGCCTCCCACGCCCATTG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔIg construct; the primers 5’-CTGCACACTTGGTCCTGGTTTTCACGATCAGCTCCGCGTA-3’ and 5’-TACGCGGAGCGTCGTGAAAACCAGGACCAAGTGTGCAG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-1 construct; the primers 5’-CCGCCAGGGCCTCCCCTCACCGAGGAAGACGTTCCAGGAG-3’ and 5’-CTCCTGGAACGTCTTCCTCGGTGAGGGGAGGCCCTGGCGG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-2 construct; the primers 5’-GAGGAGCTGGTGGTGCAGACTAAAATTTCAGCTCCATCCA-3’ and 5’-TGGATGGAGCTGAAATTTTAGTCTGCACCACCAGCTCCTC-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-3 construct and the 5’-GTCACCACTCGGATTGCCACCGGTGCCTCCACCCAGAATT-3’ and 5’-AATTCTGGGTGGAGGCACCGGTGGCAATCCGAGTGGTGAC-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-4 construct.  2.4 Immunoblotting  Sf9 cells were lysed in a standard lysis buffer (20 mM Tris·HCl, pH 7.5, 1% Triton X-100, 150 mM sodium chloride, 2 mM Benzamidine, 2.5μg/ml Aprotinin, 2.5μg/ml Leupeptin, and 0.5μg/ml Pepstatin). Samples were solubilized in 2X SDS loading buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE. Samples were transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (Whatman, Piscataway, NJ) and immunoblotted with SK18 (Brady-Kalnay et al. 1993), which cross-reacts with PTPρ.  2.5 Cell surface expression of PTPρ  Cell surface expression of PTPρ protein in baculovirus infected Sf9 cells was determined using a modified biotin-avidin reaction with the Cell Surface Protein Isolation Kit (catalog# 89991, Pierce, Rockford, IL), as previously described (Yu et al. 2008). Briefly, Sf9 cell media was removed and the flasks were incubated with rocking for 30 minutes at 4°C in 5ml of 0.25mg/ml Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin in 1X PBS. The cells were mechanically removed from the flask, centrifuged, washed, and lysed according to the manufacturer’s protocols. To isolate cell surface expressed PTPρ the cell lysate was added to a NeutrAvidin Gel column and incubated for 60 min at room temperature (RT) with rocking prior to washing and eluting proteins with 200μl of sample buffer containing a final concentration of 55mM DTT for 60min at RT. The flow through was run on 6% SDS-PAGE gels and transferred to nitrocellulose. Total cell surface protein levels were normalized by immunoblotting cell lysates with an anti-actin antibody (JLA20). The normalized cell surface protein was run on 6% SDS-PAGE gels, transferred to nitrocellulose and immunoblotted with antibodies to PTPμ that also recognized PTPρ (SK18) followed by secondary antibody conjugated to HRP. The HRP signal was detected using a Fluor-S MAX MultiImager (Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc., Hercules, CA).  2.6 Aggregation Assays  Sf9 cells were harvested by trituration. The cell suspensions were added to glass scintillation vials and incubated at 27°C at 90 rpm in a gyratory shaker for 30 minutes. For a given condition, the cell suspension was transferred to a 100mm petri dish either prior to (0 time point) or 30 minutes after aggregation. Images were captured at 10X magnification with a Nikon TE-200 inverted fluorescent microscope (Tokyo, Japan). To quantify cell aggregates, pictures of four randomly selected fields were taken per dish. The area of each object (single cells and aggregates) was determined by the Metamorph software (Molecular Devices) using an auto-threshold setting for light objects and appropriate size filters that allowed the counting of cells and aggregates but not debris. The four replicates were combined to yield average readings per condition. The percent aggregation was then calculated as the average aggregate area at 30 minutes minus the average aggregate area at zero minutes divided by the average aggregate area at 30 minutes [(N30-N0)/N30]. A minimum of three independent experiments was performed per condition. Statistical significance was determined in Microsoft Excel using Student’s T-test. Error bars indicate standard error.  2.7 Site-directed mutagenesis  The I395V, Y412F, R453C, Q479E, S492F, N510K, T605M, V648G, A707T, and L708P tumor-derived mutations (Wang et al. 2004) were generated by fusion PCR using the full-length PTPRT pVL1393-V5-His vector as the template. The primers 5’-TGGCCCACAGAACGTGGAAGTCGTAGACATCAGAGCC-3’ and 5’-CTTCCACGTTCTGTGGGCCA-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the I395V mutant; the primers 5’-CAGTGGGAGCCCTTCGGCTTCGCGGTGACCCGCTGCCAT-3’ and 5’-AAGCCGAAGGGCTCCCACTG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the Y412F mutant; the primers 5’-CTACACCCTGCGAGGCCTGTGCCCCTTCATGACCATCCG-3’ and 5’-ACAGGCCTCGCAGGGTGTAG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the R453C mutant; the primers 5’-GAGCGAGGAGCTGGTGGTGGAGACTGAGGAAGACGTTCC-3’ and 5’-CCACCACCAGCTCCTCGCTC-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the Q479E mutant; the primers 5’-TGTTCCTCTAGAATTCATCCAAGGGGGGCCCT TT-3’ and 5’-ATGAATTCTAGAGGAACA-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the S492F mutant; the primers 5’-TCCAGTGGAAACCTCCCAAGGAGACCAATGGGGTCATCA-3’ and 5’-CTTGGGAGGTTTCCACTGGA-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the N510K mutant; the primers 5’-CCATTGAATGAGACAGACATGACC ATCACAGTGATGCTG3-’ and 5’-ATGTCTGTCTCATTCAATGG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the T605M mutant; the primers 5’-ATTATTGAGTGCTTTTC GGGGCCCGTGAGCTATCGGAAT-3’ and 5’-CCCGAAAAGCACTCAATAAT-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the V648G mutant; the primers 5’-CTACAGCATCTACTTCCAGACACTCAGCAAAGCCAATGG-3’ and 5’-TCTGGAAGTAGATGCTGTAG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the A707T mutant; the primers 5’-AGCATCTACTTCCAGGCACCCAGCAAAGCCAATGGAGAG-3’ and 5’-GGTGCCTGGAAGTAGATGCT-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the L708P mutant.  2.8 Mapping of PTPρ mutations onto the PTPμ crystal structure  The sequence of PTPμ and PTPρ were aligned using CLUSTALW. Mutations probed in this study were mapped using this sequence alignment onto the PTPμ structure (PDB ID: 2V5Y). The figure was prepared utilizing PyMOL 1.2r1 (http://pymol.org).  Go to: 3. Results 3.1 Deletions in the MAM, Ig, and FNIII repeat domains of PTPρ result in defective cell-cell aggregation  To test whether a protein mediates cell-cell aggregation or adhesion, one has to express the protein of interest in the non-adhesive cells. Otherwise, one cannot measure the aggregation or adhesion of a single molecule in the sea of other adhesion molecules naturally expressed in adhesive cells. This is the main reason that the non-adhesive Sf9 or Drosophila S2 cells are widely used models for such studies. To our knowledge, nearly all cell lines of epithelial origin are adhesive cells and thus are not suitable for these studies. Introduction of putative adhesion molecules into non-adhesive Drosophila S2 insect cells has been used to demonstrate adhesive functions for fasciclin II, connectin, Dtrk, ARK, Neuroglian, and Capricious molecules directly (Bellosta et al. 1995; Hortsch et al. 1995; Nose et al. 1992; Pulido et al. 1992; Shinza-Kameda et al. 2006; Snow et al. 1989). In a similar approach, we and others demonstrated that the full-length form of PTPμ induced aggregation, via a homophilic binding mechanism, when expressed in nonadhesive Sf9 insect cells, which are derived from the Fall army-worm Spodoptera frugiperda (Brady-Kalnay et al. 1993; Gebbink et al. 1993; Zondag et al. 1995). We have also used this system for analyzing PTPRT/PTP rho (Yu et al., 2008). Examples of other cell adhesion molecules that have been studied in Sf9 cells include L1 (Gouveia et al. 2008), Galectin-3 (Inohara and Raz 1995) and C-CAM1 (Phan et al. 2001). Insect S2 and Sf9 cells are extremely useful systems to analyze adhesive mechanisms of cell adhesion molecules.  The MAM domain, Ig domain, and first two-FNIII repeats are essential for PTPμ cell-cell aggregation (Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Zondag et al. 1995). To test whether these domains are the minimal essential regions required for PTPρ cell-cell aggregation, baculoviral PTPρ deletion constructs of the MAM domain, Ig domain, and each of the four individual FNIII repeats were made and expressed in non-adhesive Sf9 insect cells (Figure 1). All the PTPρ deletion constructs were expressed and appropriately trafficked to the cell surface (Figure 1). To test whether these domains contribute to PTPρ-dependent adhesion, Sf9 cells were evaluated for their ability to mediate cell-cell aggregation when expressing the deletion constructs. Aggregation assays with Sf9 cells expressing the deletion constructs were conducted alongside aggregation assays using Sf9 cells expressing wild-type PTPρ, which mediates cell-cell aggregation (Figure 2) and serves as a positive control (Yu et al. 2008). Deletion of any of the extracellular domains of PTPρ resulted in defective cell-cell aggregation compared to aggregation of wild-type PTPρ expressing Sf9 cells (Figure 2). Deletion of the fourth FNIII repeat was the least severe where ~23% aggregation was observed. Deletion of the MAM domain, Ig domain and FNIII repeats 1, 2 or 3 resulted in 5–16% aggregation. When the level of aggregation was quantified, we determined that all of the deletion constructs resulted in a large and statistically significant reduction in cell-cell aggregation (Figure 2, p-value<0.005). Together with our previous study, these results demonstrate that all of the extracellular domains of PTPρ are necessary for PTPρ-mediated cell-cell aggregation.  Figure 1 Figure 1 PTPρ deletion constructs are all expressed at the cell surface. Constructs containing deletions of one extracellular domain of PTPρ each were generated and expressed in Sf9 cells. Total cellular protein and cell surface protein were isolated ... Figure 2 Figure 2 Deletion of any of the extracellular domains of PTPρ disrupts cell-cell aggregation. Sf9 cells expressing deletion constructs of the individual extracellular domains of PTPρ were allowed to aggregate for 30 minutes prior to imaging. Scale ... 3.2 Tumor-Derived PTPρ Mutations in the FNIII repeats result in defective cell-cell aggregation  We next tested the effects of human tumor-derived mutations in the FNIII repeats of PTPρ on PTPρ-mediated cell-cell aggregation. We recently demonstrated that tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ are defective in cell-cell aggregation using the Sf9 aggregation assay (Yu et al. 2008), and given the above results, we hypothesized that mutations in the FNIII domains would likewise result in defective aggregation. Ten human tumor-derived mutations are located in the second, third and fourth FNIII repeats of PTPρ (Wang et al. 2004). To test whether these mutations also affect cell-cell aggregation, we engineered the ten human mutations by site-directed mutagenesis using the full-length PTPρ baculoviral construct as a template (see Figure 3). The ten mutations are expressed in Sf9 cells at the expected molecular weight and at similar levels to full-length human PTPρ (Figure 3). All of these mutants are expressed at the cell surface (Figure 3). When these mutant PTPρ proteins were expressed in Sf9 cells and tested in aggregation assays, we observed that all of the mutant PTPρ proteins resulted in fewer and smaller aggregates than wild type PTPρ (Figure 4). When the level of aggregation was quantified, we determined that all of the FNIII mutations significantly reduced cell-cell aggregation (16–43%) compared to cells expressing wild type PTPρ (68% aggregation, p-value<0.008, Figure 4).  Figure 3 Figure 3 PTPρ proteins containing tumor-derived mutations in their FNIII domains are expressed at the cell surface. Ten mutations in the FNIII domains of PTPρ were generated by site-directed mutagenesis and expressed in Sf9 cells. Total cellular ... Figure 4 Figure 4 Tumor derived mutations in FNIII domains of PTPρ are defective in cell-cell aggregation. Sf9 cells expressing the mutated PTPρ proteins were allowed to aggregate for 30 minutes prior to imaging. Scale bar equals 100μm. The percentage ... Go to: 4. Discussion PTPRT/PTPρ is the most highly mutated tyrosine phosphatase in human colon carcinomas. We and others found that PTPRT/ PTPρ is also mutated in lung, gastric and skin (melanoma) cancers (Forbes et al. 2008; Wang et al. 2004). The spectrum of mutations, which included nonsense mutations and frameshifts, suggested that these mutations were inactivating (Wang et al. 2004). Biochemical analyses demonstrated that missense mutations in the catalytic domains of PTPRT diminished its phosphatase activity and overexpression of PTPRT inhibited colon cancer cell growth. Moreover, we showed previously that the tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ are defective in cell-cell adhesion (Yu et al. 2008). All these data suggest that PTPRT/PTPρ normally functions as a tumor suppressor gene. The experiments presented in this manuscript evaluate the contribution of the individual extracellular domains of PTPρ to PTPρ-mediated adhesion. We demonstrate that in addition to the MAM and Ig domains, the FNIII repeats are required for PTPρ-mediated adhesion. Importantly, we also show that PTPρ-mediated adhesion is impaired by human tumor-derived mutations in those FNIII repeats. These studies indicate that all the tumor-derived mutations located in the extracellular domain of PTPRT are loss-of-function mutations, thereby providing further evidence that PTPRT is a tumor suppressor. This notion is further supported by our recent study showing that PTPRT knockout mice are highly susceptible to colon specific carcinogen azoxymethane (AOM)-induced colon cancer (Zhao et al.).  PTPμ-mediated cell-cell aggregation requires the MAM domain, Ig domain, and the first two FNIII repeats (Aricescu et al. 2006; Aricescu et al. 2007; Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Cismasiu et al. 2004; Zondag et al. 1995). The entire extracellular domain of PTPμ is predicted to make a rigid conformation with extensive interfaces between each of the domains (Aricescu et al. 2006). The minimal adhesive unit for functional cell-cell aggregation is the MAM domain, Ig domain and the first two FNIII repeats (Aricescu et al. 2006; Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Zondag et al. 1995). However, the FNIII repeats appear to play a role in spacing the key homophilic interaction domain(s) a certain distance from the plasma membrane. Deletion of the FNIII repeats changed the intercellular spacing of two apposing membranes (Aricescu et al. 2007). Cell-cell aggregation assays of the FNIII deletion constructs were not performed in that study (Aricescu et al. 2007). The amino acid residues of the interfaces between the extracellular domains are highly conserved between members of the type IIB RPTP subfamily (Aricescu et al. 2006; Aricescu et al. 2007) therefore it is likely that the PTPρ adhesive interface resembles that of PTPμ. Together our data support the hypothesis that the essential regions for PTPρ-mediated adhesion resemble those of PTPμ.  To gain insight into how the point mutations may alter the adhesive function of PTPρ, we modeled the human tumor derived PTPρ mutations onto the crystal structure of PTPμ (Figure 5). The crystal structure of PTPμ includes only the first three FNIII repeats (Aricescu et al. 2007). Four of these mutations fall within the second FNIII (FNIII-2) repeat (I395V, Y412F, R453C, Q479E). It is important to note that FNIII-2 is required for efficient cell-cell adhesion (Aricescu et al. 2006). Two of the mutations fall in the third FNIII (FNIII-3) repeat (S492F, N510K). The mutation within the linker region between FNIII-1 and FNII-2 (Y412F) could alter the flexibility or positioning between the two domains. The other mutations (I395V R453C, Q479E, S492F, N510K) appear to be clustered in surface exposed regions and/or near the linker regions between FNIII-2 and FNIII-3 that could alter flexibility, position of individual FNIII repeats and/or protein-protein interactions. While these mutations do not correspond to the adhesive interface hypothesized for PTPμ based upon a single static crystal structure (Aricescu et al. 2007), some of the mutations fall within the FNIII-2 repeat which is required for adhesion, and all of these surface modifications would likely alter either the three-dimensional topology and/or cis/trans interactions of PTPρ.  Figure 5 Figure 5 Structural modeling of the point mutations of PTPρ. The point mutations (indicated in red) evaluated in this manuscript were modeled onto the equivalent sites in the crystal structure of PTPμ. The PTPρ mutations likely alter cell-cell ... Other type IIB RPTPs also function as tumor suppressor genes, by regulating adhesion and/or tyrosine phosphorylation of effector proteins. Expression of PTPμ is reduced in human glioblastomas (GBM) and cell lines (Burgoyne et al. 2009a). Reduction in full-length PTPμ expression with a concomitant increase in a proteolytically processed cytoplasmic fragment of PTPμ is observed in GBM cells and both are correlated with decreased adhesion and increased migration observed in the disease (Burgoyne et al. 2009a; Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Over-expression of the full-length form of PTPμ suppressed migration of GBM cells and reduces their survival (Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Of note, at the same time that stable cell adhesion is reduced due to the loss of full-length PTPμ expression in GBM cells, a catalytically active cytoplasmic fragment of PTPμ is released and translocates to the nucleus (Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Catalytic activity of this fragment is also necessary for cell migration and viability of GBM cells (Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Therefore, both the tyrosine phosphatase activity of the cytoplasmic fragment of PTPμ and the loss of PTPμ-mediated adhesion may contribute to the invasiveness of GBM cells.  PTPκ is also implicated in tumor progression. PTPκ expression is reduced in melanoma cell lines and human tissue biopsies (McArdle et al. 2001), and in Hodgkin’s lymphoma cells (Flavell et al. 2008). Over-expression of PTPκ in Hodgkin lymphoma cells reduces cellular proliferation and survival (Flavell et al. 2008). Like PTPμ, PTPκ is proteolytically processed (Anders et al. 2006), potentially as a result of aberrant glycosylation (Kim et al. 2006). It is not clear whether adhesion or catalytic activity of PTPκ is required for its tumor suppressor activity (Flavell et al. 2008; Kim et al. 2006). Of note, the cleaved cytoplasmic domain fragment of PTPκ is catalytically active, translocates to the nucleus and promotes β-catenin-mediated transcription (Anders et al. 2006). Signaling via the PTPκ cytoplasmic fragment might augment the loss of stable cell-cell adhesion and may promote tumor progression.  Although speculative, it is interesting to postulate that tyrosine phosphatase activity and or cleavage of PTPρ will also be an important element of its tumor suppressor activity, as has been demonstrated for PTPμ and PTPκ. Interestingly, we identified and validated STAT3 as a direct substrate of PTPRT (Zhang et al. 2007). STAT3 is latent transcription factor that translocates from the cytoplasm to the nucleus after being phosphorylated at the Y705 residue. It is possible that the cleaved intracellular fragment of PTPρ, which contains the phosphatase domains, translocates to nucleus and dephosphorylates STAT3. Besco and colleagues found that PTPRT associates with the adhesion molecule E-cadherin and its binding partner p120 catenin, which are PTPRT substrates (Besco et al. 2006). p120 also translocates to the nucleus and associates with the Kaiso transcription factor (Daniel and Reynolds 1999). Given the frequency and distribution of mutations in PTPRT/PTPρ in human colon and other cancers, a more thorough understanding of its biological function is warranted.
61||Tyrosine phosphorylation, regulated by protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) and kinases (PTKs), is important in signaling pathways underlying tumorigenesis. A mutational analysis of the tyrosine phosphatase gene superfamily in human cancers identified 83 somatic mutations in six PTPs (PTPRF, PTPRG, PTPRT, PTPN3, PTPN13, PTPN14), affecting 26% of colorectal cancers and a smaller fraction of lung, breast, and gastric cancers. Fifteen mutations were nonsense, frameshift, or splice-site alterations predicted to result in truncated proteins lacking phosphatase activity. Five missense mutations in the most commonly altered PTP (PTPRT) were biochemically examined and found to reduce phosphatase activity. Expression of wild-type but not a mutant PTPRT in human cancer cells inhibited cell growth. These observations suggest that the mutated tyrosine phosphatases are tumor suppressor genes, regulating cellular pathways that may be amenable to therapeutic intervention. Phosphorylation of tyrosine residues is a central feature of many cellular signaling pathways, including those affecting growth, differentiation, cell cycle regulation, apoptosis, and invasion (1, 2). This phosphorylation is coordinately controlled by protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) and phosphatases (PTPs). Although a variety of PTK genes have been directly linked to tumorigenesis through somatic activating mutations (3–6), only a few PTP genes have been implicated in cancer (7–10). Moreover, it is not known how many or how frequently members of the PTP gene family are altered in any particular cancer type. We have systematically addressed these issues by comprehensive mutational analysis of the PTP gene superfamily in colorectal tumors.  The PTP gene superfamily is composed of three main families: (i) the classical PTPs, including the receptor PTPs (RPTPs) and the nonreceptor PTPs (NRPTPs); (ii) the dual specificity phosphatases (DSPs), which can dephosphorylate serine and threonine in addition to tyrosine residues; and (iii) the low molecular weight phosphatases (LMPs) (1). Using an approach similar to that described in a recent bioinformatic analysis of PTPs in the mouse genome (11), we employed a combination of Hidden Markov Models representing catalytic domains of members of the PTP superfamily to identify 53 classical PTPs (21 RPTPs and 32 NRPTPs), 33 DSPs, and one LMP in the human genome (12). This analysis revealed a set of genes representing all known human PTPs (13) as well as seven putative PTPs.  As an initial screen to evaluate whether these phosphatases are genetically altered in human cancer, we analyzed the coding exons of all 87 members of this gene superfamily in 18 colorectal cancers. A total of 1375 exons from all annotated RPTPs, NRPTPs, DSPs, and LMPs were extracted from genomic databases (12). These exons were amplified by polymerase chain reaction from cancer genomic DNA samples and directly sequenced with dye terminator chemistry (12). Whenever a presumptive mutation was identified, we attempted to determine whether it was somatically acquired (i.e., tumor specific) by examining the sequence of the gene in genomic DNA from normal tissue of the relevant patient.  From the 3.3 Mb of sequence information obtained, we identified six genes containing somatic mutations, including three members of the RPTP subfamily (PTPRF, PTPRG, and PTPRT) and three members of the NRPTP subfamily (PTPN3, PTPN13, and PTPN14). These six genes were then further analyzed for mutations in another 157 colorectal cancers. Through this strategy, we identified 77 mutations in the six genes, in aggregate affecting 26% of the colorectal tumors analyzed (table S1 and Fig. 1). Examination of these six genes in seven other tumor types identified PTPRT mutations in two of 11 (18%) lung cancers and two of 12 gastric cancers (17%), and PTPRF mutations in one of 11 (9%) lung cancers and one of 11 (9%) breast cancers. No mutations were identified in 12 pancreatic cancers, 12 ovarian cancers, 12 medulloblastomas, or 12 glioblastomas (table S1 and Fig. 1). In total, 83 nonsynonymous mutations were observed, all of which were somatic in the cancers that could be assessed (12).    Download high-res image  Open in new tab  Download Powerpoint Fig. 1. Distribution of mutations in PTPRT, PTPN13, PTPN14, PTPRG, PTPRF, and PTPN3. Black arrows indicate location of missense mutations, red arrows indicate location of nonsense mutations or frameshifts, and boxes represent functional domains (B41, band 41; CA, carbonic anhydrase; FN3, fibronectin type III; IG, immunoglobulin; MAM, meprin/A5/PTPμ; PDZ, postsynaptic density, discs large, zonula occludans; PTPc, catalytic phosphatase domain). Black stars indicate PTPRT mutants evaluated for phosphatase activity (Fig. 2), and the red star indicates PTPRT mutant evaluated for effects on cell proliferation (Fig. 3).  Fifteen of the 83 mutations were nonsense, frameshift, or splice-site alterations, all of which were predicted to result in aberrant or truncated proteins. In 16 tumors both alleles of the phosphatase gene appeared to be mutated, a characteristic often associated with tumor suppressor genes. The majority of tumors with PTP gene mutations also contained mutations in KRAS or BRAF, and nine tumors contained alterations in previously reported tyrosine kinase genes (table S1). Thus, the mutant phosphatases identified in this study are likely to operate through cellular pathways distinct from those associated with previously identified mutant kinases.  Analysis of mutations in tumors is complicated by the fact that mutations can arise either as functional alterations affecting key genes underlying the neoplastic process or as nonfunctional “passenger” changes. The multiple waves of clonal expansion and selection that occur throughout tumorigenesis lead to fixation of any mutation that had previously occurred in any predecessor cell, regardless of whether the mutation was actually responsible for the clonal expansion. Two independent lines of evidence suggest that the sequence alterations we observed are functional. First, the ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous mutations provides an indication of selection, as synonymous alterations usually do not exert a growth advantage. There were no somatic synonymous mutations detected in the colorectal cancers analyzed, resulting in a ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous mutations of 77 to 0, much higher than the expected 2:1 ratio for nonselected passenger mutations (P < 1 × 10–6). Second, the prevalence of mutations in the coding regions of the analyzed genes was ∼19 per Mb of tumor DNA, similar to the prevalence of functional somatic alterations observed in other gene families [e.g., the tyrosine kinome (6)] and significantly higher than the prevalence of nonfunctional alterations previously observed in the cancer genomes (∼1 per Mb, P < 0.01) (14). These data support the idea that these mutations were the targets of selection during tumorigenesis.  The great majority of the nonsense and frameshift mutations (Fig. 1) would result in polypeptides devoid of C-terminal phosphatase catalytic domains, thereby leading to inactivation of the phosphatase. To evaluate whether tumor-specific point mutations alter phosphatase activity, we biochemically tested mutant versions of PTPRT, the most frequently mutated PTP in the superfamily. Mutations in both intracellular PTP domains (D1 and D2) were evaluated. His-tagged versions of the catalytic region of wild-type PTPRT, two D1 mutants (Q987K and N1128I), and three D2 mutants (R1212W, R1346L, and T1368M) were produced in bacteria and analyzed for phosphatase activity by using 6,8-difluoro-4-methylumbelliferyl phosphate (DiFMUP) as a substrate (Fig. 2) (12). All D1 and D2 mutants had reduced phosphatase activity compared with the wild-type protein (Fig. 2). The kinetic parameter Kcat was reduced in both D1 mutants, while Km was increased in all three D2 mutants, suggesting that mutations in the two domains may have different effects on enzymatic activity. Although it has been thought that the D2 domain is usually catalytically inactive (1), our results are consistent with recent studies that show that the D2 domain is important for phosphatase activity in some receptor phosphatases (15).    Download high-res image  Open in new tab  Download Powerpoint Fig. 2. Evaluation of phosphatase activity of mutant PTPRT. (A) Saturation kinetics of wild-type and mutant PTPRT. His-tagged versions of PTPRT protein segments comprising the two catalytic domains containing wild-type (WT) and tumor-specific mutant sequences were expressed in bacteria and purified using nickelaffinity chromatography. Equal amounts of WT and mutant proteins were used to evaluate enzyme kinetics. The rate of hydrolysis of substrate (DiFMUP) is plotted against increasing substrate concentration. Data were fitted to the Michaelis-Menton equation, and the resulting kinetic parameters of WT and mutant proteins are indicated in (B).  These biochemical data on missense mutations, coupled with the large number of truncating mutations, suggested that PTPRT functions as a tumor suppressor gene. To determine whether PTPRT expression can inhibit tumor cell growth, we transfected wild-type PTPRT into HCT116 colorectal cancer cells (12). An identical expression vector containing an R632X mutant of PTPRT was used for comparison. Wild-type PTPRT potently inhibited cell growth in this assay, as seen by the substantial decrease in the number of neomycin-resistant colonies compared with the R632X mutant or with vector alone (Fig. 3, A and B). Similar results with wild-type and mutant PTPRT were also observed in DLD1 colorectal cancer cells.    Download high-res image  Open in new tab  Download Powerpoint Fig. 3. PTPRT overexpression suppresses growth of human cancer cells. (A) HCT116 colorectal cancer cells were transfected with wild-type (WT) PTPRT construct, truncated R632X mutant PTPRT construct, or empty pCI-Neo vector. The photographs show colonies stained with crystal violet after 14 days of geneticin selection. (B) Number of resistant colonies (mean of two 25 cm2 flasks) for WT PTPRT, mutant PTPRT, and empty vector.  The combination of these genetic, biochemical, and cellular data suggest that PTPRT and the other identified phosphatases are likely to act as tumor suppressors. This is consistent with the function of other phosphatases implicated in tumorigenesis (7, 8, 16) and with the general role of phosphatases in inhibiting various growth-promoting signaling pathways (2). The absence of biallelic mutations in a subset of the analyzed tumors suggests that some alterations may act in a dominant-negative fashion or may affect gene dosage, mechanisms that have been previously involved in inactivation of other tumor suppressor genes (17, 18).  Little is known about the functional role of the tyrosine phosphatases discussed here. PTPN13 appears to be involved in apoptosis (19) and may be partly responsible for the antitumor effects of tamoxifen (20). Overexpression of PTPN3 inhibits growth of NIH/3T3 cells, possibly through interaction with valosin-containing protein (VCP/p97) (21). PTPN14 and PTPRF are thought to play a role in cell adhesion by regulating tyrosine phosphorylation of adherens junction proteins (22, 23). Because increased phosphorylation of adherens junctions has been shown to increase cell motility and migration (22, 24), mutational inactivation of these genes may be an important step in cancer cell invasion and metastasis. PTPRG maps to chromosome 3p14.2, a region frequently lost in lung, renal, and early-stage breast tumors, and is thought to be a target of the translocation at 3p14 in familial renal cell carcinoma (25–27). However, no point mutations in PTPRG (28) or any of the other genes identified here have been previously described in any cancer. PTPRT is expressed in the developing central nervous system and in the adult cerebellum (29) and had not been thought to play a role in the growth or differentiation of other tissues. We have found that PTPRT is expressed in a variety of human tissues, including normal colon epithelium as well as cells derived from colorectal cancers (fig. S1).  Phosphatases affect signaling pathways that may be amenable to therapeutic intervention in cancer cells (2). Although reactivation of incapacitated phosphatases is likely to be pharmacologically challenging, identification of the corresponding kinases that phosphorylate substrates normally regulated by the mutant phosphatases could provide novel therapeutic targets. Like the analysis of genetic alterations in tyrosine kinases (6), the present study suggests the possibility of individualized therapy based on the mutant phosphatases present in specific tumors. Conceivably, this approach would have broad therapeutic use, because more than 50% of colorectal tumors analyzed to date have alterations in at least one member of the tyrosine phosphatome or kinome.
62||Most cancers are characterized by increased STAT3 activation where phosphorylated STAT3 levels are associated with reduced survival. The molecular mechanisms underlying aberrant STAT3 phosphorylation/activation in human malignancies have been elusive. Our findings provide a mechanistic basis for tumor-specific STAT3 hyperactivation in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). We demonstrate that receptor-like protein tyrosine phosphatases, encoded by PTPR genes, including PTPRT, are commonly mutated in HNSCC where PTPR mutations are associated with increased phosphorylation of STAT3 in tumors. Several cancer-related PTPRT mutations localize to the substrate interaction surface of the enzyme catalytic domains. Expression of mutated PTPRT in HNSCC models markedly increases STAT3 activation, promoting cellular survival. PTPRT mutations may therefore serve as predictive biomarkers for STAT3 pathway inhibitors, suggesting new therapeutic opportunities.  Keywords: STAT3 activation, driver mutations, phosphatase mutations Go to: ABSTRACT The underpinnings of STAT3 hyperphosphorylation resulting in enhanced signaling and cancer progression are incompletely understood. Loss-of-function mutations of enzymes that dephosphorylate STAT3, such as receptor protein tyrosine phosphatases, which are encoded by the PTPR gene family, represent a plausible mechanism of STAT3 hyperactivation. We analyzed whole exome sequencing (n = 374) and reverse-phase protein array data (n = 212) from head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs). PTPR mutations are most common and are associated with significantly increased phospho-STAT3 expression in HNSCC tumors. Expression of receptor-like protein tyrosine phosphatase T (PTPRT) mutant proteins induces STAT3 phosphorylation and cell survival, consistent with a “driver” phenotype. Computational modeling reveals functional consequences of PTPRT mutations on phospho-tyrosine–substrate interactions. A high mutation rate (30%) of PTPRs was found in HNSCC and 14 other solid tumors, suggesting that PTPR alterations, in particular PTPRT mutations, may define a subset of patients where STAT3 pathway inhibitors hold particular promise as effective therapeutic agents.  Tyrosine phosphorylation regulates a multitude of cellular processes by coordinately activating and inactivating signaling proteins. Aberrations of protein tyrosine phosphorylation and signaling are a hallmark for oncogenic events found in most human cancers. The phosphorylation/dephosphorylation of tyrosine residues on signaling proteins is directly mediated by protein tyrosine kinases and phosphatases. Although many cellular factors are known to dynamically control the activity of these enzymes, genetic alterations of kinases and phosphatases in human cancers lead to perturbations in the levels of tyrosine phosphorylated proteins, uncontrolled cell growth, and tumor formation. Although activating mutations of tyrosine kinases have been extensively studied (1, 2), cancer-associated mutations of tyrosine phosphatases remain incompletely understood, partly due to the lack of comprehensive genomic analysis of these large arrays of phosphatases, as well as their largely unknown and often ambiguous actions in normal physiology and cancer biology.  Among the 107 known protein tyrosine phosphatases, the receptor protein tyrosine phosphatases (RPTPs) represent the largest family of the human tyrosine phosphatome, comprising 21 family members (3). These RPTPs are believed to be crucial for the regulation of inter- as well as intracellular signaling due to the cell-surface localization of RPTPs. Selected members of the RPTP family have been reported to function as tumor suppressors, where gene mutation, deletion, or methylation may contribute to the cancer phenotype (3).  STAT3 is an oncogene, and constitutive STAT3 activation is a hallmark of human cancers. Activating STAT3 mutations are rare in all cancers studied to date, including head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) (4). Although activating mutations of upstream receptor tyrosine kinases leading to increased STAT3 phosphorylation characterize some malignancies [e.g., EGFR mutations in non-small cell lung cancer (5)], most cancers lack these alterations yet harbor elevated phospho-STAT3 (p-STAT3) levels. We (Z.W.) previously reported that STAT3 serves as a substrate for wild-type PTPRT enzyme (also known as RPTP-T, RPTPρ, or RPTPrho) in colorectal cancer cells (SW480 and HT29) and HEK293T cells (6). STAT3 has additionally been reported to be a substrate of PTPRD (also known as PTPδ) in glioblastoma models, suggesting that several RPTP family members may exhibit tumor-suppressive function by dephosphorylating STAT3 (7). In the present study, we hypothesized that mutation of RPTP family members, including PTPRT, results in elevated expression levels of tyrosine phosphorylated STAT3 in human HNSCC. Analysis of reverse-phase protein array and sequencing data demonstrated significant association between PTPR mutation and increased p-STAT3 expression levels in HNSCC, establishing the de novo signaling consequence of PTPR mutations on a major oncogenic pathway that drives human carcinogenesis. Studies in HNSCC models demonstrate that PTPRT mutations induce p-STAT3 and HNSCC survival, consistent with a “driver” phenotype whereas computational modeling revealed functional implications of PTPR mutations on phospho-tyrosine (p-Tyr)–substrate interactions. Analysis of whole-exome sequencing results of 374 primary head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs) revealed that PTPR genes are mutated in nearly one-third (30.7%) of HNSCC tumors, compared with a 15.2% mutation rate in the cytoplasmic protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) family. This pattern is strikingly consistent across an additional 14 types of solid tumors sequenced to date, implicating a potentially important pathologic contribution of PTPR mutations to human carcinogenesis. These cumulative findings suggest that genetic alterations of selected PTPRs, including PTPRT, may induce STAT3 activation and serve as predictive biomarkers for treatment with emerging STAT3 pathway inhibitors.  Go to: RESULTS PTPR Mutations Significantly Correlate with in Situ p-STAT3(Y705) Up-Regulation in HNSCC Patient Tumors. To date, associations between PTPR alterations and human cancers have relied on cell-line models. It remains undetermined whether tumor-specific mutations of these key tyrosine phosphatases mediate STAT3 hyperactivation in human tumors, including HNSCC. Using reverse phase protein array (RPPA), we conducted an integrative proteomic-genomic analysis on HNSCC patient tumors. We sought to determine whether PTPR mutation is correlated with altered STAT3(Y705) phosphorylation in primary HNSCC tumor specimens. Strikingly, examination of 212 HNSCC primary tumors showed that tumors harboring mutations in PTPR tumor suppressor genes (including PTPRD/J/K/M/O/S/T) (3) expressed significantly higher levels of p-STAT3(Y705) compared with tumors with wild-type PTPR family members (P = 0.02) (Fig. 1A). These results provide evidence of a direct association between PTPR mutation and elevated STAT3 phosphorylation/activation in human tumors in situ and establish a plausible mechanism for STAT3 hyperactivation in human cancers. In contrast, we observed no correlation between p-STAT3(Y705) expression and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), p-EGFR(Y1068), p-EGFR(Y1173), suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS), Src, or interleukin 6 (IL6) expression. Additionally, HNSCC tumors harboring multiple PTPR mutations exhibited an even greater increase in p-STAT3(Y705) expression although the number of tumors in these groups is insufficient for statistical analysis (n = 14, 2, 1, or 1, for tumors with 2, 3, 4, or 5 PTPR mutations per tumor, respectively). Upregulation of p-STAT3(Y705) was further confirmed by immunohistochemistry in HNSCC tumors harboring PTPR mutations (Fig. S1) and in HNSCC cell lines harboring endogenous PTPR mutations (Fig. S2).  Fig. 1. Fig. 1. PTPR mutations correlate with STAT3 tyrosine phosphorylation in HNSCC tumors and enhance survival and STAT3 phosphorylation in HNSCC cells. (A) Significant increase in p-STAT3(Y705) expression (intensity plot in log2 scale; protein array data from The ... PTPRT Mutations “Drive” HNSCC Cell Survival and STAT3 Activation. The biologic/functional consequences of tumor-derived PTPR mutations in HNSCC are unknown. To determine whether HNSCC PTPRT mutations act as “drivers,” we developed a serum-dependent HNSCC cell line (PCI-52-SD1) that undergoes rapid cell death in the absence of serum. Using this model, stable expression of two representative mutants (calculated to result in both charge and amino acid size changes) (Table S1), PTPRT(A1022E) and PTPRT(R1040L), conferred increased survival (3.2- and 6.2-fold, respectively) compared with expression of empty vector control, confirming a driver phenotype for these PTPRT mutants in HNSCC cells (Fig. 1B).  To investigate the mechanism responsible for the driver phenotype of the PTPRT mutants, we tested the hypothesis that PTPRT mutations identified in HNSCC may impair the phosphatase activity of the enzyme, resulting in increased phosphorylation of PTPRT substrates, including the oncogenic transcription factor STAT3. Stable expression of wild-type PTPRT in PCI-52-SD1 cells resulted in reduction of basal p-STAT3 levels by ∼48% (P = 0.0014) (Fig. 1C), demonstrating that wild-type PTPRT can modulate STAT3 activation in HNSCC cells. On the other hand, expression of a PTPRT protein harboring a mutation (A1022E) in the catalytic domain promoted up-regulation of the p-STAT3 protein in an HNSCC cell line with low basal levels of p-STAT3 (CAL-33) (Fig. 1D). Similar effects were observed in HEK293 cells upon transient expression of a PTPRT mutant (Fig. S3). Interestingly, expression of a PTPRT protein with a mutation (P497T) in the extracellular fibronectin type III-like domain did not alter the phosphorylation status of STAT3 (Fig. 1D), suggesting that mutations outside the catalytic domains may have other mechanisms of action. In addition, expression of wild-type PTPRT in EGFR-knockout mouse embryonic fibroblasts resulted in decreased expression of p-STAT3(Y705), suggesting that PTPRT catalytic activity is independent of EGFR expression/activity (Fig. S4).  Computational Modeling of PTPRT Mutations in the Substrate Binding Sites Reveals Plausible Functional Alterations of Phosphatase Activity. Given that a high percentage of PTPRT mutations are located within the enzymatic (PTPase) domain, we sought to determine the potential impact of these mutations on interactions between the catalytic domains and phospho-tyrosine substrate using a molecular modeling approach. Although the structure of a PTPRT–p-Tyr protein complex is not available, the X-ray crystallographic structure of the PTPRT phosphatase domain alone has been reported (PDB ID code 2OOQ) (8). Therefore, we determined by homology modeling (9), the approximate substrate-interacting surface of the PTPRT PTPase domains 1 and 2 (Fig. 2 A–D) based on the highly similar (to PTPRT) crystal structure of human tyrosine phosphatase PTPN5 in complex with p-Tyr (detailed in Materials and Methods). Using this model, we localized several cancer-related PTPRT mutation sites to the substrate-interaction surface of the PTPRT PTPase domains 1 and 2 in close proximity to incorporated p-Tyr (D905, R928, H1053, G1089, and V1124 in domain 1; Q1180, R1201, R1207, P1213, Q1286, T1346, N1380, G1382, and R1384 in domain 2). Mutation sites previously shown to decrease the PTPRT phosphatase activity were also found in proximity to p-Tyr regions (C1084, D1052, Y893, Q965, R1188, and T1346) (10, 11). These results suggest that PTPRT PTPase domain mutations, which are found in human cancers, likely interfere with enzymatic activity and/or substrate interactions. Of note, in addition to the reported missense mutations of the PTPRT PTPase domains, many nonsense mutations (mutation to a stop codon) and frameshift mutations are highly likely to alter PTPRT structure and stability, as well as impacting substrate interactions (L362fs, R617fs, Q434*, and Q615* found in HNSCC, and E1227*, R1207*, E1155*, R1358*, and G1386* in other cancers; COSMIC database).  Fig. 2. Fig. 2. Computational modeling of PTPRT PTPase domain in complex with a phospho-tyrosine substrate. (A) PTPRT PTPase domain 1 in complex with phospho-tyrosine (p-Tyr, green) of substrate (e.g., p-STAT3). The surface involved in the interaction with partner (p-Tyr-containing) ... PTPR Genes Are Mutated in Nearly One-Third of HNSCC Tumors, and PTPRT Is the Most Frequently Mutated PTPR. PTPRT belongs to the receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase family, which comprises 21 members, and no genomic study to date has examined the mutational profile of the entire family in a large number of human tumor specimens. To understand the potential genetic contributions of the PTPR family (in addition to PTPRT) to tyrosine signaling/regulation in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), we comprehensively analyzed PTPR family mutations in large cohorts of primary HNSCC tumors. Whole-exome sequencing data of 374 primary HNSCCs were included [from 300 TCGA HNSCC tumors and 74 HNSCCs previously published (12)]. Strikingly, 30.7% (115/374) of HNSCC tumors harbored nonsynonymous somatic mutations of at least one PTPR family member, compared with only 15.2% (57/374) of tumors with mutations of cytoplasmic PTP genes, the second major family of PTPs (Fig. 3A). Further, 7.8% (29/374) of HNSCC tumors contained multiple mutations of PTPR family members (from two to six PTPR mutations/tumor) (Fig. 3B) (Table S2 contains all PTPR mutations found in HNSCC). Further investigation demonstrated that this high rate of somatic mutation of the PTPR family (vs. cytoplasmic PTPs) found in HNSCC is also detected in all 14 types of human solid tumors sequenced to date by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) (4,039 total solid tumors sequenced), but not in a hematopoietic malignancy (6/196 AML cases; 3.1%) (Fig. 3C and Table S3), implicating a likely pathologic involvement of PTPR mutations in HNSCC, as well as other solid human tumors.  Fig. 3. Fig. 3. Whole-exome sequencing of human cancers demonstrates high rates of PTPR somatic mutations. (A) Frequencies of PTPR (the receptor subtype) and cytoplasmic PTP somatic mutations in 374 HNSCC tumors. (B) A subset (29/374, 7.8%) of HNSCC tumors harbor mutations ... Human papilloma virus (HPV) infection is a known etiologic factor in a subset of HNSCC and is capable of disrupting genome stability. Thus, we examined whether HPV was associated with the high rate of PTPR mutations in HNSCC. Statistical analysis showed no correlation between PTPR mutation and HPV status (P = 0.31; PTPR mutations in 11/48 HPV-positive tumors vs. 93/299 HPV-negative tumors), indicating that HPV is not a contributing factor to PTPR mutations in HNSCC. Further analysis showed that PTPR mutations were not associated with mutations of TP53 (P = 0.81), NOTCH1 (P = 0.24), PIK3CA (P = 0.47), or HRAS (P = 0.77) in HNSCC, indicating that PTPR mutations are independent of these known common mutational events in HNSCC tumors (12).  The availability of comprehensive whole-exome sequencing data (from TCGA) on all PTPR genes allowed us to identify the most commonly mutated PTPRs in all sequenced human cancers, including HNSCC. Among the 374 sequenced HNSCC tumors, PTPRT is the most frequently mutated PTPR (5.6% cases; 22 mutations total, with one tumor harboring 2 PTPRT mutations), followed by PTPRC, PTPRD, and PTPRM (Table S2). Although PTPR mutation rates vary among different cancer types, cumulative results reveal that PTPRT is the single most commonly mutated PTPR in human cancers (6.2%, 285 mutations in 4,609 solid and hematopoietic cancers sequenced) (Table S3), with the highest mutation frequency of PTPRT in cutaneous melanoma (a total of 99 mutations in 253 tumors sequenced; 39.1%).  The sites of the most frequently mutated PTPR members (PTPRT/C/D/M) in HNSCC are shown in Fig. 3D (all other HNSCC-associated PTPR mutations are shown in Fig. S5). Cumulative mutation data for PTPRT in 16 types of sequenced tumors indicate that 37.9% (108/285) of PTPRT mutations are found in the catalytic phosphatase (PTPase) domain whereas 33.0% (94/285) occur in the extracellular fibronectin type III-like (FN3) domain. In HNSCC, 45.5% (10/22) of PTPRT mutations are located in the PTPase domain (Fig. 3D), indicating the pathologic relevance of these genetic alterations of the phosphatase activity, which lead to pSTAT3 up-regulation in HNSCC tumors.  Go to: DISCUSSION These cumulative results indicate that selected tumor-associated PTPRT mutations can alter STAT3 phosphorylation/activation. Our findings suggest a previously undescribed, and potentially common, mechanism for dysregulated cell survival and growth involving PTPR mutation and STAT3 hyperactivation. Therefore, tumors that harbor PTPR (including PTPRT) mutations may be amenable to treatment with STAT3 pathway inhibitors. The frequency of PTPR mutations is unexpectedly high across all solid tumor types analyzed to date. The dispersed distribution and lack of hotspot mutations in PTPR genes suggest that these mutations likely represent loss-of-function events affecting tumor suppressive proteins rather than gain-of-function of oncogenic proteins in cancer. Although this mutation pattern is consistent with that reported for select PTPRs in colorectal cancers (10), this study represents a comprehensive analysis of somatic mutations of the entire PTPR family across all human cancers sequenced to date.  Constitutive STAT3 activation is frequently found in nearly all human cancers, and expression levels of p-STAT3(Y705) are often associated with poor prognosis (13–15). Mechanisms driving STAT3 activation in cancer are incompletely understood. Direct sequencing of thousands of patient tumors by TCGA has not identified common or consistent STAT3 mutational events in solid tumors. Furthermore, solid tumors, including HNSCC, exhibit a lack of activating mutations in kinases upstream of STAT3 (4). Thus, activating mutations of STAT3, or of direct upstream positive regulators, are unlikely to be the key genetic factors driving STAT3 hyperactivation in human cancers. PTPRT has been reported to be a negative regulator of STAT3 (6). Our integrative genomic-proteomic findings establish that PTPRT mutations are important genetic events that drive in situ up-regulation of p-STAT3(Y705) within patient tumors. This reveals the driver role of genetic mutations in a negative regulator(s) of STAT3, an important oncogenic signaling protein in human cancer. PTPRT has been previously shown to be a tumor suppressor (in colon cancer cell line models), consistent with our present findings (16). Our results suggest that loss-of-function mutations in tumor suppressor tyrosine phosphatases may not only serve as permissive factors for oncogenesis as previously demonstrated, but can also act as direct drivers for cancer cell growth via dysregulation of substrate tyrosine phosphorylation.  Studies of PTPRT, in particular, showed that PTPRT has a discretely defined set of substrates, including STAT3 and paxillin. In our current study, the correlation between paxillin phosphorylation and PTPRT mutations was not examined, as anti–phospho-paxillin antibody has not been validated for our protein array platform. However, it is possible that paxillin signaling may also be affected by PTPRT mutations in the human tumors.  Computational modeling allows us to predict the potential effects of PTPase domain mutations (located intracellularly) in PTPRT, which may be applicable to other RPTP proteins. However, there are no existing computational methodologies to reliably predict the effects of the extracellular domain mutations (such as the FN3 domain mutations) found in these proteins. The broad existence of these extracellular domain mutations in the RPTP family will require systematic functional validation of each mutation in relevant cell models, as we have previously shown that some of these mutations could alter cell–cell adhesion, and thereby promote tumor cell migration (17).  The present study demonstrates that wild-type PTPRT promotes down-regulation of p-STAT3(Y705) in HNSCC and that somatic PTPRT mutations may represent “driving” events in cancer. We identify that somatic PTPR mutations, including PTPRT mutations, are associated with elevated p-STAT3(Y705) in human HNSCC. Other RPTP family members, especially PTPRD, may play similar roles in HNSCC and other solid tumors, where somatic mutation may lead to loss-of-function and subsequent activation of oncogenic pathways. Indeed, several commonly mutated PTPRs have been implicated as tumor suppressors, including PTPRD (18), PTPRF (10), PTPRG (10, 19), PTPRJ (20), and PTPRS (21).  In conclusion, PTPR mutational events are relatively common in primary HNSCC, as well as in many other solid tumors as revealed by large-scale whole-exome sequencing studies. We demonstrate that tumor-specific mutational events in the PTPRT gene can serve as direct drivers for tumor growth by inducing hyperactivation of STAT3, a potent oncogenic transcription factor and PTPRT substrate. STAT3 pathway inhibitors are under active investigation in human cancers and include transcription factor decoys, disruptors of recruitment of STAT3 to the IL6/IL6Ralpha/gp130 complex, and upstream kinase inhibitors, primarily Janus kinase inhibitors (22, 23). It is biologically plausible that selected PTPR mutations may identify tumors that may be particularly responsive to treatment with STAT3 pathway inhibitors.
63||Tyrosine phosphorylation, regulated by protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) and kinases (PTKs), is important in signaling pathways underlying tumorigenesis. A mutational analysis of the tyrosine phosphatase gene superfamily in human cancers identified 83 somatic mutations in six PTPs (PTPRF, PTPRG, PTPRT, PTPN3, PTPN13, PTPN14), affecting 26% of colorectal cancers and a smaller fraction of lung, breast, and gastric cancers. Fifteen mutations were nonsense, frameshift, or splice-site alterations predicted to result in truncated proteins lacking phosphatase activity. Five missense mutations in the most commonly altered PTP (PTPRT) were biochemically examined and found to reduce phosphatase activity. Expression of wild-type but not a mutant PTPRT in human cancer cells inhibited cell growth. These observations suggest that the mutated tyrosine phosphatases are tumor suppressor genes, regulating cellular pathways that may be amenable to therapeutic intervention. Phosphorylation of tyrosine residues is a central feature of many cellular signaling pathways, including those affecting growth, differentiation, cell cycle regulation, apoptosis, and invasion (1, 2). This phosphorylation is coordinately controlled by protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) and phosphatases (PTPs). Although a variety of PTK genes have been directly linked to tumorigenesis through somatic activating mutations (3–6), only a few PTP genes have been implicated in cancer (7–10). Moreover, it is not known how many or how frequently members of the PTP gene family are altered in any particular cancer type. We have systematically addressed these issues by comprehensive mutational analysis of the PTP gene superfamily in colorectal tumors.  The PTP gene superfamily is composed of three main families: (i) the classical PTPs, including the receptor PTPs (RPTPs) and the nonreceptor PTPs (NRPTPs); (ii) the dual specificity phosphatases (DSPs), which can dephosphorylate serine and threonine in addition to tyrosine residues; and (iii) the low molecular weight phosphatases (LMPs) (1). Using an approach similar to that described in a recent bioinformatic analysis of PTPs in the mouse genome (11), we employed a combination of Hidden Markov Models representing catalytic domains of members of the PTP superfamily to identify 53 classical PTPs (21 RPTPs and 32 NRPTPs), 33 DSPs, and one LMP in the human genome (12). This analysis revealed a set of genes representing all known human PTPs (13) as well as seven putative PTPs.  As an initial screen to evaluate whether these phosphatases are genetically altered in human cancer, we analyzed the coding exons of all 87 members of this gene superfamily in 18 colorectal cancers. A total of 1375 exons from all annotated RPTPs, NRPTPs, DSPs, and LMPs were extracted from genomic databases (12). These exons were amplified by polymerase chain reaction from cancer genomic DNA samples and directly sequenced with dye terminator chemistry (12). Whenever a presumptive mutation was identified, we attempted to determine whether it was somatically acquired (i.e., tumor specific) by examining the sequence of the gene in genomic DNA from normal tissue of the relevant patient.  From the 3.3 Mb of sequence information obtained, we identified six genes containing somatic mutations, including three members of the RPTP subfamily (PTPRF, PTPRG, and PTPRT) and three members of the NRPTP subfamily (PTPN3, PTPN13, and PTPN14). These six genes were then further analyzed for mutations in another 157 colorectal cancers. Through this strategy, we identified 77 mutations in the six genes, in aggregate affecting 26% of the colorectal tumors analyzed (table S1 and Fig. 1). Examination of these six genes in seven other tumor types identified PTPRT mutations in two of 11 (18%) lung cancers and two of 12 gastric cancers (17%), and PTPRF mutations in one of 11 (9%) lung cancers and one of 11 (9%) breast cancers. No mutations were identified in 12 pancreatic cancers, 12 ovarian cancers, 12 medulloblastomas, or 12 glioblastomas (table S1 and Fig. 1). In total, 83 nonsynonymous mutations were observed, all of which were somatic in the cancers that could be assessed (12).    Download high-res image  Open in new tab  Download Powerpoint Fig. 1. Distribution of mutations in PTPRT, PTPN13, PTPN14, PTPRG, PTPRF, and PTPN3. Black arrows indicate location of missense mutations, red arrows indicate location of nonsense mutations or frameshifts, and boxes represent functional domains (B41, band 41; CA, carbonic anhydrase; FN3, fibronectin type III; IG, immunoglobulin; MAM, meprin/A5/PTPμ; PDZ, postsynaptic density, discs large, zonula occludans; PTPc, catalytic phosphatase domain). Black stars indicate PTPRT mutants evaluated for phosphatase activity (Fig. 2), and the red star indicates PTPRT mutant evaluated for effects on cell proliferation (Fig. 3).  Fifteen of the 83 mutations were nonsense, frameshift, or splice-site alterations, all of which were predicted to result in aberrant or truncated proteins. In 16 tumors both alleles of the phosphatase gene appeared to be mutated, a characteristic often associated with tumor suppressor genes. The majority of tumors with PTP gene mutations also contained mutations in KRAS or BRAF, and nine tumors contained alterations in previously reported tyrosine kinase genes (table S1). Thus, the mutant phosphatases identified in this study are likely to operate through cellular pathways distinct from those associated with previously identified mutant kinases.  Analysis of mutations in tumors is complicated by the fact that mutations can arise either as functional alterations affecting key genes underlying the neoplastic process or as nonfunctional “passenger” changes. The multiple waves of clonal expansion and selection that occur throughout tumorigenesis lead to fixation of any mutation that had previously occurred in any predecessor cell, regardless of whether the mutation was actually responsible for the clonal expansion. Two independent lines of evidence suggest that the sequence alterations we observed are functional. First, the ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous mutations provides an indication of selection, as synonymous alterations usually do not exert a growth advantage. There were no somatic synonymous mutations detected in the colorectal cancers analyzed, resulting in a ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous mutations of 77 to 0, much higher than the expected 2:1 ratio for nonselected passenger mutations (P < 1 × 10–6). Second, the prevalence of mutations in the coding regions of the analyzed genes was ∼19 per Mb of tumor DNA, similar to the prevalence of functional somatic alterations observed in other gene families [e.g., the tyrosine kinome (6)] and significantly higher than the prevalence of nonfunctional alterations previously observed in the cancer genomes (∼1 per Mb, P < 0.01) (14). These data support the idea that these mutations were the targets of selection during tumorigenesis.  The great majority of the nonsense and frameshift mutations (Fig. 1) would result in polypeptides devoid of C-terminal phosphatase catalytic domains, thereby leading to inactivation of the phosphatase. To evaluate whether tumor-specific point mutations alter phosphatase activity, we biochemically tested mutant versions of PTPRT, the most frequently mutated PTP in the superfamily. Mutations in both intracellular PTP domains (D1 and D2) were evaluated. His-tagged versions of the catalytic region of wild-type PTPRT, two D1 mutants (Q987K and N1128I), and three D2 mutants (R1212W, R1346L, and T1368M) were produced in bacteria and analyzed for phosphatase activity by using 6,8-difluoro-4-methylumbelliferyl phosphate (DiFMUP) as a substrate (Fig. 2) (12). All D1 and D2 mutants had reduced phosphatase activity compared with the wild-type protein (Fig. 2). The kinetic parameter Kcat was reduced in both D1 mutants, while Km was increased in all three D2 mutants, suggesting that mutations in the two domains may have different effects on enzymatic activity. Although it has been thought that the D2 domain is usually catalytically inactive (1), our results are consistent with recent studies that show that the D2 domain is important for phosphatase activity in some receptor phosphatases (15).    Download high-res image  Open in new tab  Download Powerpoint Fig. 2. Evaluation of phosphatase activity of mutant PTPRT. (A) Saturation kinetics of wild-type and mutant PTPRT. His-tagged versions of PTPRT protein segments comprising the two catalytic domains containing wild-type (WT) and tumor-specific mutant sequences were expressed in bacteria and purified using nickelaffinity chromatography. Equal amounts of WT and mutant proteins were used to evaluate enzyme kinetics. The rate of hydrolysis of substrate (DiFMUP) is plotted against increasing substrate concentration. Data were fitted to the Michaelis-Menton equation, and the resulting kinetic parameters of WT and mutant proteins are indicated in (B).  These biochemical data on missense mutations, coupled with the large number of truncating mutations, suggested that PTPRT functions as a tumor suppressor gene. To determine whether PTPRT expression can inhibit tumor cell growth, we transfected wild-type PTPRT into HCT116 colorectal cancer cells (12). An identical expression vector containing an R632X mutant of PTPRT was used for comparison. Wild-type PTPRT potently inhibited cell growth in this assay, as seen by the substantial decrease in the number of neomycin-resistant colonies compared with the R632X mutant or with vector alone (Fig. 3, A and B). Similar results with wild-type and mutant PTPRT were also observed in DLD1 colorectal cancer cells.    Download high-res image  Open in new tab  Download Powerpoint Fig. 3. PTPRT overexpression suppresses growth of human cancer cells. (A) HCT116 colorectal cancer cells were transfected with wild-type (WT) PTPRT construct, truncated R632X mutant PTPRT construct, or empty pCI-Neo vector. The photographs show colonies stained with crystal violet after 14 days of geneticin selection. (B) Number of resistant colonies (mean of two 25 cm2 flasks) for WT PTPRT, mutant PTPRT, and empty vector.  The combination of these genetic, biochemical, and cellular data suggest that PTPRT and the other identified phosphatases are likely to act as tumor suppressors. This is consistent with the function of other phosphatases implicated in tumorigenesis (7, 8, 16) and with the general role of phosphatases in inhibiting various growth-promoting signaling pathways (2). The absence of biallelic mutations in a subset of the analyzed tumors suggests that some alterations may act in a dominant-negative fashion or may affect gene dosage, mechanisms that have been previously involved in inactivation of other tumor suppressor genes (17, 18).  Little is known about the functional role of the tyrosine phosphatases discussed here. PTPN13 appears to be involved in apoptosis (19) and may be partly responsible for the antitumor effects of tamoxifen (20). Overexpression of PTPN3 inhibits growth of NIH/3T3 cells, possibly through interaction with valosin-containing protein (VCP/p97) (21). PTPN14 and PTPRF are thought to play a role in cell adhesion by regulating tyrosine phosphorylation of adherens junction proteins (22, 23). Because increased phosphorylation of adherens junctions has been shown to increase cell motility and migration (22, 24), mutational inactivation of these genes may be an important step in cancer cell invasion and metastasis. PTPRG maps to chromosome 3p14.2, a region frequently lost in lung, renal, and early-stage breast tumors, and is thought to be a target of the translocation at 3p14 in familial renal cell carcinoma (25–27). However, no point mutations in PTPRG (28) or any of the other genes identified here have been previously described in any cancer. PTPRT is expressed in the developing central nervous system and in the adult cerebellum (29) and had not been thought to play a role in the growth or differentiation of other tissues. We have found that PTPRT is expressed in a variety of human tissues, including normal colon epithelium as well as cells derived from colorectal cancers (fig. S1).  Phosphatases affect signaling pathways that may be amenable to therapeutic intervention in cancer cells (2). Although reactivation of incapacitated phosphatases is likely to be pharmacologically challenging, identification of the corresponding kinases that phosphorylate substrates normally regulated by the mutant phosphatases could provide novel therapeutic targets. Like the analysis of genetic alterations in tyrosine kinases (6), the present study suggests the possibility of individualized therapy based on the mutant phosphatases present in specific tumors. Conceivably, this approach would have broad therapeutic use, because more than 50% of colorectal tumors analyzed to date have alterations in at least one member of the tyrosine phosphatome or kinome. Protein tyrosine phosphatase ρ (PTPρ) belongs to the classical receptor type IIB family of protein tyrosine phosphatase, the most frequently mutated tyrosine phosphatase in human cancer. There are evidences to suggest that PTPρ may act as a tumor suppressor gene and dysregulation of Tyr phosphorylation can be observed in diverse diseases, such as diabetes, immune deficiencies and cancer. PTPρ variants in the catalytic domain have been identified in cancer tissues. These natural variants are nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms, variations of a single nucleotide occurring in the coding region and leading to amino acid substitutions. In this study we investigated the effect of amino acid substitution on the structural stability and on the activity of the membrane-proximal catalytic domain of PTPρ. We expressed and purified as soluble recombinant proteins some of the mutants of the membrane-proximal catalytic domain of PTPρ identified in colorectal cancer and in the single nucleotide polymorphisms database. The mutants show a decreased thermal and thermodynamic stability and decreased activation energy relative to phosphatase activity, when compared to wild- type. All the variants show three-state equilibrium unfolding transitions similar to that of the wild- type, with the accumulation of a folding intermediate populated at ∼4.0 M urea.  Go to: Introduction The classical protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) superfamily includes 38 proteins which specifically dephosphorylate phosphotyrosine residues and, in concert with protein tyrosine kinases, control a large number of diverse biological processes, such as cell proliferation, adhesion, apoptosis and migration [1]–[6]. Reversible tyrosine phosphorylation controls numerous signaling pathways which require a right balance between kinase and phosphatase activity. The involvement of PTP in controlling cellular signaling has been largely recognized [2], [5], [7], though the role of PTP in human diseases has not been explored so extensively as that of protein kinases. However in diverse diseases, such as cancer, diabetes and immune deficiencies, dysregulation of Tyr phosphorylation has been observed [4], [7], [8].  On the basis of their counteracting activity on the oncogenic protein tyrosine kinase, PTPs have been initially considered as potential tumor suppressors, however it is clear that several phosphatases have oncogenic properties [2]–[6], [9]. Over the last decade a limited number of phophatases have been studied systematically to evaluate their role in tumorigenesis. In particular, six mutated phosphatases have been directly linked to colorectal cancers [1], [10]; among the six mutated genes, the PTPRT gene encoding PTPρ (PDB accession code 2OOQ) was found to be most frequently mutated and it was also mutated in about 20% of lung and gastric cancer [10].  PTPρ belongs to the classical receptor type IIB family of PTP. The 107 PTPs encoded by the human genome are classified into four classes, on the basis of the amino acid sequence of their catalytic domain. Class I includes 61 dual-specificity phosphatases and 38 classical phosphotyrosine-specific phosphatase which are further divided into receptor and non-transmembrane groups [5], [7]. The full-length PTPρ contains an extracellular domain, formed by a meprin-A5 antigen-PTP (MAM) domain and Ig-like and fibronectin type III-like repeats, a single transmembrane segment and one or two cytoplasmic catalytic domains. The catalytically active proximal D1 domain is adjacent to the membrane and is connected to the inactive membrane-distal D2 domain [3], [5]. The PTP membrane-proximal catalytic domain consists of about 280 residues that fold into a highly conserved α/β structure [4], [11]. Conserved functional elements of the catalytic PTP domain are the PTP signature motif, the mobile “WPD” loop, a highly conserved aspartate residue required for catalysis and the phosphotyrosine recognition loop.  In cancer tissues several PTPρ variants in the catalytic domain have been identified and there is evidence to suggest that PTPρ may act as a tumor suppressor gene [10]. These natural variants are nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs), single nucleotide variations occurring in the coding region and leading to a polypeptide sequence with amino acid substitutions.  A large number of amino acid substitutions originate from nsSNPs and an increasingly large number of diseases and defects reported in Human Gene Mutation Database [12] and Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) [13] are referred to nsSNPs [14]. Although most nsSNPs are considered not to affect protein function, computational analysis predicts that around 30% of protein variants resulting from nsSNPs are less stable than the most common variant [15]. The effect of disease-causing nsSNPs on protein structure and function has been widely investigated by computational analysis, and change in protein stability has been suggested as the most common mechanism involved in monogenic disease [16]–[18]. However, nsSNPs may also affect and modulate the protein function by altering protein dynamics without affecting protein stability [19]. Notably, since genetic variations related to nsSNPs may influence individual susceptibility to complex diseases such as cancer [20] or response to drugs, a more extended study about the effect of nsSNPs on protein structure may help in understanding their role in inducing protein functional changes [21]. To date there are few experimental data available concerning the consequences of nsSNPs on protein function and stability.  In this study we investigate the effect of amino acid substitutions identified in colorectal cancer [10] and in the single nucleotide polymorphisms database [18], [22], [23] on the thermodynamic stability and on the activity of the membrane-proximal catalytic domain of PTPρ [1], [24]. The analysis revealed that, in comparison to the wild-type, the thermal and thermodynamic stability of all the mutants are decreased as well as the activation energy relative to the phosphatase activity, indicating an increase in protein flexibility of all the PTPρ mutants. All the variants show three-state equilibrium unfolding transitions similar to that of the wild-type, with the accumulation of a folding intermediate at ∼4.0 M urea.  To our knowledge, this study represents the first spectroscopic and thermodynamic characterization of human PTPρ catalytic domain and some of its mutants found in cancer. In addition, the effects of none of the mutations reported in this manuscript on protein thermodynamic stability has been previously investigated.  Go to: Results Four mutations of the PTPρ membrane-proximal catalytic domain in public databases have been identified: D927G, Q987K, N1128I and A1118P. Introduction of these mutations resulted in soluble recombinant protein only for D927G, Q987K and N1128I whereas the A1118P mutant could not be expressed in the soluble fraction even when different growth and induction conditions were used. Mapping of the mutations onto the structure of the PTPρ catalytic domain revealed that A1118P is located in the middle of a central helix (Fig. 1). It is likely that the introduction of a proline residue at this position in substitution of alanine will break the helical secondary structure resulting in misfolding of the catalytic domain. N1128 is located at the C-terminal end of the same helix (Fig. 1B). This residue is located in a very polar environment with flanking acidic (E1124, E1127, E1129) and a histidine residue (H974) located in a neighbouring loop region. D927G and Q987K are located in solvent exposed loops with little interaction with other amino acid side chains (Fig. 1C). The solvent accessibility of the mutated residues Asp-927 and Gln-987 is more than 70% and Asn-1128 is 49% solvent exposed. The mutation D927G involves a residue (Asp-927) placed in a 4 residues turn between two coils. In the wild-type Asp-927 connects different protein secondary structure regions through hydrogen bonds with three residues. One hydrogen bond is between the N of the peptide bond and the OD2 of Asp-947 and the other two hydrogen bonds are between the carbonyl of the peptide bond and the amidic nitrogens of Lys-930 and Glu-931. The carboxylic moiety of Asp-927 is completely solvent exposed and does not apparently make any contact with other residues.  Figure 1 Figure 1 Location of PTPρ mutations. Spectroscopic characterization of PTPρ wild-type and its mutants  The near-UV CD spectrum of wild-type PTPρ shows the contribution of all aromatic residues and is characterized by two negative components centred at 280 nm and at around 298 nm accompanied by fine structure features at 275–280 nm (Fig. 2A). Q987K variant displays a near-UV CD spectrum almost identical to that of the wild-type as well as D927G and N1128I, which nevertheless show a slight decrease of the dichroic activity at 275–280 nm. In line with the near-UV CD results, which suggest a similar tertiary arrangement for the wild-type and all the variants, the fluorescence emission spectra of mutants are similar to that of wild-type protein, being all centred at the same maximum emission wavelength around 338 nm but characterized by a decreased emission fluorescence intensity (Fig. 2B). Far-UV CD spectra of all the PTPρ mutants superimpose well with that of the wild-type and are typical of an alpha and beta protein, showing a local minimum at around 208 nm, a 200 nm zero intercept and a 1.13 ratio of the 208/222 bands (Fig. 2C). These results indicate that the SNP mutations had no effect on the secondary structure of the protein and suggest that, in the native state, the effect of the mutations are directed and localized to the mutated residue with minor modification of tertiary arrangements.  Figure 2 Figure 2 Spectroscopic properties of PTPρ wild-type and mutants. Thermal unfolding  The thermal stability of D927G, Q987K and N1128I was investigated by continuously monitoring the ellipticity changes at 209 nm between 10 and 72°C in comparison with that of wild-type (Fig. 3). The parameter chosen to compare the transition curves of PTPρ wild-type and mutants is the melting temperature (Tm) defined as the mid point of the denaturation process calculated by plotting the first derivative of the molar ellipticity values as a function of temperature (Fig. 3, inset). The temperature-induced ellipticity changes at 209 nm, where the main amplitude was observed, occur in an apparent cooperative transition for PTPρ wild-type, Q987K, N1128I and D927G, and with apparent Tm values of 43.0, 42.0, 41.0 and 40.0°C, respectively. The temperature-induced ellipticity changes for wild type and mutants are all coincident with the heat-induced increase of the photomultiplier tube voltage (PMTV) above 370 V (Fig. 3B), suggesting that the temperature-induced unfolding is accompanied by protein aggregation [25]. Aggregation occurred also when thermal scans were performed at a lower heating rate with a low-temperature shifts of the apparent Tm; the differences between the apparent Tm of wild type and variants were the same as those measured at higher heating rate (data not shown). The observed transitions are irreversible as indicated by the spectra measured at the end of the cooling phase that differ from those of the native proteins measured at the beginning of the thermal transitions (data not shown). Furthermore, inspection of the cuvette at the end of the cooling phase revealed the presence of a large amount of precipitate in all the samples.  Figure 3 Figure 3 Thermal transition of PTPρ wild-type and mutants. Temperature dependence of phosphatase activity  The temperature dependence of phosphatase activity of PTPρ wild-type and variants was examined over the temperature range of 10–42°C (Fig. 4A). The optimal temperatures were estimated to be at 37°C for wild type and Q987K, at around 33°C for N1128I and at 30°C for D927G (Fig. 4A). Notably, at 37°C, the phosphatase activity of all PTPρ variants is significantly reduced and corresponds to 72, 54 and 20% of that of the wild-type protein for Q987K, N1128I and D927G, respectively. The activation energy, Ea‡, determined by the Arrhenius equation (1) in the temperature range between 10°C and the optimal temperature of each protein, corresponds to 13.88±0.40 kcal/mol for the wild-type and to 12.77±0.51, 10.73±0.54 and 11.38±0.46 kcal/mol for N1128I, D927G and Q987K (Fig. 4B), respectively. This result suggests an increased flexibility of all the variants compared to the wild-type, particularly evident for N1128I and D927G whose phosphatase activity is significantly decreased at 42°C. The comparison of temperature dependence of phosphatase activity with the structural thermal unfolding monitored at 209 nm clearly indicates that the D927G and N1128I variants are significantly more flexible and less thermal resistant than the wild-type.  Figure 4 Figure 4 Effect of temperature on phosphatase activity of PTPρ wild-type and mutants. Urea-induced equilibrium unfolding transitions  PTPρ wild-type and variants reversibly unfold in urea at 10°C in 20 mM TrisHCl, pH 7.5, containing 200 µM DTT and 0.2 M NaCl. The effect of increasing urea concentrations (0–8 M) on the structure of PTPρ mutants was analyzed by far-UV CD and intrinsic fluorescence emission spectroscopy and compared to the wild-type.  Incubation of PTPρ wild-type and variants at increasing urea concentrations at 10°C for 30 min, a time sufficient to reach the equilibrium, resulted in a progressive change of the intrinsic fluorescence emission intensity and a red-shift of the maximal emission wavelength. At the end of the transition, above 7 M urea, the intrinsic fluorescence emission intensity is increased about 1.5 fold and the maximal fluorescence emission wavelength shifts to around 358 nm either for the wild-type and all the variants (Fig. 5). Determination of the red-shift of the intrinsic fluorescence emission was obtained by calculating the intensity averaged emission wavelength An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name is pone.0032555.e001.jpg at increasing urea concentration (Fig. 6A). This parameter is an integral measurement, negligibly influenced by the noise, and reflects changes in both the shape and the position of the emission spectrum.  Figure 5 Figure 5 Intrinsic fluorescence emission spectra of PTPρ wild-type and mutants. Figure 6 Figure 6 Urea-induced equilibrium unfolding of PTPρ wild-type and mutants. The same samples used to monitor the fluorescence emission changes during the unfolding transition were used to monitor far-UV CD ellipticity (Fig. 6A). The unfolding process is fully reversible upon dilution of the denaturant, either for the wild-type as well as for all the mutants (Fig. 6A). The urea-induced changes in intensity averaged emission wavelength An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name is pone.0032555.e003.jpg and in 222 nm ellipticity of all the mutants are similar to that of the wild-type and show a sigmoidal dependence on urea concentration, following an apparent two-state transition. However, the transitions monitored by ellipticity changes and An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name is pone.0032555.e004.jpg changes do not coincide (Fig. 6A) suggesting the possible presence of an intermediate in the transition region at approximately 4 M urea for the wild-type and for all the variants. The plot of the relative fluorescence intensity changes versus urea concentration shows a complex dependence upon increasing denaturant concentration for the wild-type and all the mutants (Fig. 6B). The data in Fig. 6B clearly indicate a non two-state unfolding process and the population of a denaturation intermediate at about the same urea concentration of the apparent denaturation midpoints observed by ellipticity and An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name is pone.0032555.e005.jpg averaged changes (Fig. 6 A and B). The folding intermediate detected by relative fluorescence intensity is populated at around 4.45 M urea for wild-type and Q987K and at around 3.95 M urea for D927G and N1128I. The intrinsic fluorescence emission spectra of the folding intermediate are similar for all the proteins: the fluorescence intensity is increased of about 1.5 fold and the maximum emission wavelength is shifted from 338 to 345 nm, with respect to the native state (Fig. 5). The hyperfluorescent intermediate of wild-type and variants retains about 35% of the 222 nm ellipticity of the native state (Fig. 6A).  The transitions monitored by relative fluorescence intensity changes (Fig. 6B) were fitted to a three-state unfolding process which yielded the thermodynamic parameters for wild-type and the variants of PTPρ (Table 1). For the first transition, m values are all closely similar to that of the wild-type, suggesting a similar unfolding mechanism for all the variants; ΔG values lower than that of the wild-type are observed for N1128I and D927G, suggesting a destabilization of the native state for these two variants, that also show a decreased thermal stability (see Fig. 3 and and4).4). For the second transition, that represents the unfolding of the intermediate to the denatured state, the m values of all the proteins are lower than those of the first transition, indicating that a larger increase in solvent-exposed surface area occur in the unfolding from the native to the intermediate state (Table 1). Notably, ΔG values relative to the second unfolding transition for N1128I and Q987K are larger than those relative to the first transition, suggesting a higher stability of the intermediate states, compared to that of the wild-type.  Table 1 Table 1 Thermodynamic parameters for urea-induced unfolding equilibrium of PTPρwild-type and mutants. The near-UV CD changes of D927G, the most temperature sensitive variant, upon increasing urea concentrations were monitored in comparison with wild-type (Fig. 7) to better characterize the nature of the intermediate state. The resulting data were analyzed after removal of the high-frequency noise and the low-frequency random error by a singular value decomposition algorithm (SVD) which resolved two main spectra components either for wild-type or for the mutant D927G. The most significant singular values were 2.05×103 for wild-type and 1.96×103 for D927G, the second singular values were 38.2% and 40.1% of the first singular value for wild-type and D927G, respectively. The plots of the first (V1) and of the second column (V2) of the V matrix which reflect the global change in the 250–320 nm region as a function of urea concentration show non-two state transition profiles comparable to the transitions monitored by intrinsic fluorescence emission intensity and confirm the accumulation of an intermediate at around 4.2 M urea (Fig. 7 B, and C). At this denaturant concentration, the near-UV CD spectra of wild-type and D927G significantly differ from those of the native state and are completely opposite in sign (Fig. 7A). The 298 nm negative band is lost and a positive contribution at 289 nm is present in the spectra of the intermediate state of both proteins. Furthermore, the 280–260 nm region, dominated by contribution of Phe and Tyr residues, in D927G is less defined than the wild-type (Fig. 7A). The data clearly indicate that both the spectral components of the wild-type and D927G contribute to the urea induced transitions with the accumulation of a denaturation intermediate at the same urea concentration range observed by monitoring intrinsic fluorescence intensity (Fig. 5 and Fig. 6B).  Figure 7 Figure 7 Effect of urea on near-UV CD spectra of PTPρ wild-type and D927G. The urea-induced unfolding transitions monitored by far-UV CD ellipticity changes are non-coincident with those monitored by fluorescence (Fig. 6) and near-UV CD (Fig. 7). To identify the number of spectral components contributing to the urea-induced ellipticity changes, far-UV CD spectra were analysed after removal of the high-frequency noise and the low-frequency random error by SVD. The global changes in the spectral region 213–250 nm, analyzed by SVD, indicate that only two spectral components contribute to the far-UV CD spectra of wild-type and all the variants. The most significant singular values are very similar for wild-type and all the variants and range between 1.76×105 and 1.67×105. The second singular values are 19.8% of the first singular value for the wild-type, 16.6% for the D927G variant, 11.2% for Q987K and 8.0% for N1128I. All the other singular values are below 7.0% of the largest singular value and progressively decrease approaching to zero. The plots of the first column of the V matrix (V1), which reflect the global change in the 213–250 nm region, as a function of urea concentration (data not shown) show sigmoidal transition profiles comparable to the transitions monitored at 222 nm for the wild-type and the variants (data not shown). Non cooperative changes of V2 at increasing denaturant are observed. Furthermore, the reconstituted spectra of the first spectral component superimposed well with those of the sum of the first and the second spectral component (data not shown), indicating that only the first spectral component contributed to the urea induced transitions monitored by ellipticity at 222 nm. These results indicate an apparent two-state process for far-UV CD unfolding transitions of wild-type and variants. Thus the data have been globally fitted to a two-state model according to equation 4 with the m parameter shared between all the data sets. The free energy of unfolding, ΔGH2O, of wild-type and mutants obtained from the global fitting are very similar and correspond to 3.56±0.09, 3.63±0.10, 3.65±0.10 and 3.82±0.07 kcal/mol for wild-type, N1128I, D927G and Q987 K, respectively, for a shared m value of 1.06±0.05 kcal/mol/M. Equilibrium unfolding of PTPρ wild-type and variants occurs via a hyperfluorescent intermediate state that cannot be detected by far-UV CD. Hence, the thermodynamic folding intermediate may represent a conformational change which occurs in the proximity of any of the tryptophans most likely due to an increase of native state flexibility [26].  Go to: Discussion PTPρ, which belongs to the classical receptor type IIB family of PTP, is one of the most frequently mutated PTP in human cancers [1], [24]. In this study we investigated the effect of amino acid substitution on the thermal and thermodynamic stability and on the activity, of the membrane-proximal catalytic D1 domain of PTPρ. Catalytically active fragments of several PTPs of type IIB family are proteolytically cleaved and released within the cytoplasm of tumour cells [27]–[29], hence the biophysical characterization of this catalytic domain may be relevant. The D1 domain is a monomeric, structurally independent and stable folding unit characterized by a high thermodynamic stability. In this study, we selected PTPρ mutations of D1 domain found in colorectal cancers [10] and reported in nsSNP database [14], D927G, Q987K, A1118P and N1128I. All the mutants are expressed as soluble recombinant proteins, except A1118P which remains insoluble also upon different growth and induction conditions. The spectroscopic properties of the wild-type compared with those of all the variants indicate that the mutations D927G, Q987K and N1128I had no effect on protein secondary structure with minor modifications of tertiary arrangements.  All the mutants show a decrease in the thermal stability and in the activation energy for phosphatase activity with respect to the wild-type indicating an increase in protein flexibility of all the mutants. Hence, at 37°C the phosphatase activity of all the variants was significantly reduced, similarly to what reported by Wang et al. for Q987K and N1128I [10]. The most destabilizing mutation, D927G, yielded a protein that at physiological temperature was almost completely inactive.  All the mutations studied here are located at very diverse positions in the structure, distant from the catalytic site and, except A1118P, in solvent-exposed loop regions. Presumably, the change in main chain flexibility caused by the most destabilizing D927G mutation may lead to local disorder and may affect the stabilizing hydrogen bonds of residues in close proximity (Asp-947, Lys-930 and Glu-931). This hypothesis is in agreement with the changes in local environment of aromatic residues suggested by the comparison of the near-UV CD spectrum of D927G with that of the wild-type. The N1128I mutation is less destabilizing than D927G. In the wild-type structure N1128, about 50% solvent accessible, is located in a very polar environment at the C-terminus of helix 8 and is involved, through its peptidic nitrogen, in a hydrogen bond with the peptide carbonyl of Asp-1124. The susbtitution of a polar residue, Asn-1128, to a nonpolar residue, Ile, may also contribute to destabilize the N1128I mutant. Q987K is the least destabilizing mutation with regard to thermal stability and temperature dependence of phosphatase activity, probably due to the fact that Gln-987 in the wild-type structure is not involved in any interaction with other protein residues.  All the variants, as revealed by intrinsic fluorescence emission intensity, show three-state equilibrium unfolding transitions similar to that of the wild-type, with the accumulation of a hyperfluorescent intermediate at ∼4.0 M urea that retains 35% of the native secondary structure ellipticity. The hyperfluorescent intermediate of wild-type and of D927G, the most temperature sensitive variant, contains tertiary contacts, although the packing of aromatic side-chains appears different from that of the native state.  The reversibility of the urea-induced unfolding equilibrium at low temperature allows a quantitative determination of the effect of mutations on the thermodynamic parameters of PTPρ catalytic domain. The destabilizing effect of mutations caused by nsSNPs on PTPρ thermodynamic stability (Table 1) may be referred i) to a destabilization of the native state for N1128I and D927G, as indicated by the values of ΔGH2OI-N lower than that of the wild-type, and ii) to a stabilization of the intermediate for all the variants, as suggested by the higher free energy of unfolding from the intermediate to the unfolded state (ΔGH2OU-I), with respect to that of the wild-type (Table 1). The destabilizing effect of D927G and N1128I substitutions is also evident from the decrease in melting temperature monitored by secondary structure changes and from the significant reduction of phosphatase activity at 37°C that suggests a higher flexibility of the two variants with respect to the wild-type.  The reversible equilibrium unfolding transitions monitored by far-UV CD are not coincident with those monitored by near-UV CD and intrinsic fluorescence emission intensity and do not reveal any denaturation intermediate. The thermodynamic parameters relative to the apparent two-state equilibrium unfolding measured by far-UV CD do not indicate any significant difference between the variants and the wild-type and are lower than those determined by intrinsic fluorescence emission intensity. In particular, the shared m value of 1.06 kcal/mol/M calculated from global fitting of the far-UV CD equilibrium unfolding data is significantly lower than the predicted m value for a monomeric protein of 280 amino acid residues unfolded in urea which is 3.71±0.3 kcal/mol/M [30], a value closely similar to that measured by fluorescence intensity. As a matter of fact, fluorescence intensity is extremely sensitive to the microenvironment of a fluorophore and is considered as the most straightforward signal that can be related to thermodynamics of unfolding transitions [31]. The discrepancy between the thermodynamic parameters obtained by far-UV CD and fluorescence intensity and the lack of a detectable intermediate by far-UV CD may indicate that the hyperfluorescent intermediate state represents conformational changes which occur in the proximity of any of the tryptophans, with an alternative tertiary arrangement. In the native state, the maximum emission wavelength (λmax = 338 nm) indicate that tryptophan residues are shielded from the solvent, whereas a partial exposure of tryptophan residues to the solvent is observed for the intermediate (λmax = 345 nm). These results are in agreement with the structural data which indicate that in PTPρ two out of the five tryptophans, Trp-994 and Trp-998, are located in the same helical region (helix 6) and Trp-926, Trp-1023 and Trp-1072 are placed in coil regions. All the five tryptophans are almost completely buried. In the native state the solvent accessibility of the five chromophores is 15% for Trp-998, 14% for Trp-926 and 4% for Trp-1023, whereas all the other tryptophan residues are completely buried. Hence, at approximately 4.0 M urea, it is impossible to assign to any of the five chromophores a particular role in the fluorescence properties of the intermediate state.  In conclusion our results revealed a destabilizing and inactivating role of the mutations of PTPρ D1 domain found in colorectal cancers [10]. All the amino acid mutations studied here are on the surface of PTPρ and could potentially participate in protein-protein interactions. The stabilization of a folding intermediate, coincident with an alternative tertiary arrangement, may play a role in recognition and interaction with other substrate proteins as well as in sensitivity of this phosphatase to degradation.
64||The receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase T (PTPRT/PTPρ) is the most frequently mutated tyrosine phosphatase in human cancer. PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation. In its extracellular region, PTPρ has cell adhesion molecule-like motifs, including a MAM domain, an immunoglobulin domain and four fibronectin type III (FNIII) repeats. Tumor-derived mutations have been identified in all of these extracellular domains. Previously, we determined that tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and immunoglobulin domains of PTPρ reduce homophilic cell-cell aggregation. In this manuscript, we describe experiments in which we evaluated the contribution of the FNIII repeats to PTPρ-mediated cell-cell adhesion. Our results demonstrate that deletion of the FNIII repeats of PTPρ result in defective cell-cell aggregation. Furthermore, all of the tumor-derived mutations in the FNIII repeats of PTPρ also disrupt cell-cell aggregation. These results further support the hypothesis that mutational inactivation of PTPρ may lead to cancer progression by disrupting cell-cell adhesion.  Keywords: Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase, PTPRT, PTPρ, fibronectin type III repeat, cell-cell aggregation, cell-cell adhesion Go to: 1. Introduction Cancer progression and metastasis is in part influenced by changes in cell adhesion and tyrosine phosphorylation mediated by cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) (Paschos et al. 2009; Wheelock et al. 2008), as well as tyrosine kinases and tyrosine phosphatases, respectively (Freiss and Vignon 2004; Ostman et al. 2006). Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatases (RPTPs) comprise a family of proteins that have extracellular CAM domains coupled to cytoplasmic tyrosine phosphatase domains, and thus can impact cancer progression by regulating both cell adhesion and tyrosine phosphorylation (Brady-Kalnay 2001; Ostman et al. 2006).  The type IIB PTPμ-like subfamily of RPTPs includes PTPμ, PTPρ, PTPκ, and PCP-2 (PTPλ) (Aricescu et al. 2008; Brady-Kalnay 2001). The extracellular segment of the PTPμ-like RPTPs contain motifs found in CAMs, including a MAM domain, an immunoglobulin (Ig) domain and four fibronectin type III (FNIII) repeats (Aricescu et al. 2008; Brady-Kalnay 2001; Ostman et al. 2006). PTPμ subfamily members bind homophilically (i.e. the “ligand” for PTPμ is an identical PTPμ molecule on an adjacent cell) (Brady-Kalnay et al. 1993; Cheng et al. 1997; Gebbink et al. 1993; Sap et al. 1994; Yu et al. 2008; Zondag et al. 1995). The Ig domain of PTPμ is responsible for promoting homophilic interactions (Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994), and proper cell surface localization (Del Vecchio and Tonks 2005). However, both the MAM and Ig domains as well as the first two FNIII repeats are required for efficient cell-cell adhesion of PTPμ (Aricescu et al. 2006; Aricescu et al. 2007; Aricescu et al. 2008; Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Cismasiu et al. 2004; Zondag et al. 1995). PTPρ and PTPκ also mediate homophilic cell-cell adhesion (Sap et al. 1994; Yu et al. 2008). However, PCP2 has not yet been demonstrated to mediate cell-cell adhesion or aggregation although in vitro binding studies indicate it can bind homophilically (Cheng et al. 1997).  All type IIB RPTPs are potential tumor suppressor genes (Burgoyne et al. 2009a; Flavell et al. 2008; McArdle et al. 2001; Yan et al. 2006). Notably, PTPρ is the most frequently mutated phosphatase gene in human cancers including colon, lung, skin and stomach cancers (Forbes et al. 2008; Wang et al. 2004). Defective adhesion mediated by PTPρ may be at least one mechanism of cancer progression. In fact, cancer derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ are defective in mediating cell-cell aggregation (Yu et al. 2008).  In addition to the tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ previously described (Wang et al. 2004; Yu et al. 2008), the majority of extracellular domain mutations are located in the FNIII repeats of PTPρ (Wang et al. 2004). Given the importance of FNIII repeats in PTPμ-mediated adhesion and aggregation (Aricescu et al. 2007), we tested the contribution of the FNIII repeats of PTPρ to PTPρ-mediated adhesion. We determined that deletion constructs where each of the extracellular domains of PTPρ is removed, including the FNIII repeats, are defective in mediating cell-cell aggregation of Sf9 cells. Furthermore, when we engineered the cancer-derived mutations in the FNIII repeats of these PTPρ mutant proteins, they also result in defective cell-cell aggregation. These results demonstrate the importance of the FNIII repeats in contributing to proper cell-cell adhesion and suggest that adhesion mediated by PTPρ is likely important for the tumor suppressor activity of PTPρ.  Go to: 2. Materials and methods 2.1 Baculovirus generation  Baculoviruses were generated by transfecting cells with the BaculoGold™ Linearized Baculovirus DNA (BD Biosciences, San Diego, CA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The baculovirus for wild-type PTPρ was previously described (Yu et al. 2008).  2.2 Sf9 cell culture  Insect Sf9 cells from (BD Biosciences) were maintained at 27°C in Graces Insect Medium (BD Biosciences). The medium was supplemented with 10% FBS from (Hyclone, Logan, UT) and Gentamicin (MP Biomedicals, Solon, OH). Viruses were added to Sf9 cell medium to induce the expression of proteins of interest. Cells were harvested 30 hours post-infection for further analysis.  2.3 Generation of PTPRT deletion constructs  The PTPρ-ΔMAM, PTPρ-ΔIg, PTPρ-ΔFNIII-1, PTPρ-ΔFNIII-2, PTPρ-ΔFNIII-3 and PTPρ-ΔFNIII-4 constructs were generated by fusion PCR using the full-length PTPRT pVL1393-V5-His vector as the template. The primers 5’-GAAGATCTATGGCGAGCCTCGCCGCG-3’ and 5’-CCGGAATTCGGATCCTGGGGCGCTCTGAGCCCGGG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔMAM construct; the primers 5’-GCGTGGGAGGCTCTCTGCATGGATGAGCAAGGAC-3’ and 5’-CAATGGGTCTTGCTCATCCATGCAGAGAGCCTCCCACGCCCATTG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔIg construct; the primers 5’-CTGCACACTTGGTCCTGGTTTTCACGATCAGCTCCGCGTA-3’ and 5’-TACGCGGAGCGTCGTGAAAACCAGGACCAAGTGTGCAG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-1 construct; the primers 5’-CCGCCAGGGCCTCCCCTCACCGAGGAAGACGTTCCAGGAG-3’ and 5’-CTCCTGGAACGTCTTCCTCGGTGAGGGGAGGCCCTGGCGG-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-2 construct; the primers 5’-GAGGAGCTGGTGGTGCAGACTAAAATTTCAGCTCCATCCA-3’ and 5’-TGGATGGAGCTGAAATTTTAGTCTGCACCACCAGCTCCTC-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-3 construct and the 5’-GTCACCACTCGGATTGCCACCGGTGCCTCCACCCAGAATT-3’ and 5’-AATTCTGGGTGGAGGCACCGGTGGCAATCCGAGTGGTGAC-3’ were used to generate the PTPρ-ΔFNIII-4 construct.  2.4 Immunoblotting  Sf9 cells were lysed in a standard lysis buffer (20 mM Tris·HCl, pH 7.5, 1% Triton X-100, 150 mM sodium chloride, 2 mM Benzamidine, 2.5μg/ml Aprotinin, 2.5μg/ml Leupeptin, and 0.5μg/ml Pepstatin). Samples were solubilized in 2X SDS loading buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE. Samples were transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (Whatman, Piscataway, NJ) and immunoblotted with SK18 (Brady-Kalnay et al. 1993), which cross-reacts with PTPρ.  2.5 Cell surface expression of PTPρ  Cell surface expression of PTPρ protein in baculovirus infected Sf9 cells was determined using a modified biotin-avidin reaction with the Cell Surface Protein Isolation Kit (catalog# 89991, Pierce, Rockford, IL), as previously described (Yu et al. 2008). Briefly, Sf9 cell media was removed and the flasks were incubated with rocking for 30 minutes at 4°C in 5ml of 0.25mg/ml Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin in 1X PBS. The cells were mechanically removed from the flask, centrifuged, washed, and lysed according to the manufacturer’s protocols. To isolate cell surface expressed PTPρ the cell lysate was added to a NeutrAvidin Gel column and incubated for 60 min at room temperature (RT) with rocking prior to washing and eluting proteins with 200μl of sample buffer containing a final concentration of 55mM DTT for 60min at RT. The flow through was run on 6% SDS-PAGE gels and transferred to nitrocellulose. Total cell surface protein levels were normalized by immunoblotting cell lysates with an anti-actin antibody (JLA20). The normalized cell surface protein was run on 6% SDS-PAGE gels, transferred to nitrocellulose and immunoblotted with antibodies to PTPμ that also recognized PTPρ (SK18) followed by secondary antibody conjugated to HRP. The HRP signal was detected using a Fluor-S MAX MultiImager (Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc., Hercules, CA).  2.6 Aggregation Assays  Sf9 cells were harvested by trituration. The cell suspensions were added to glass scintillation vials and incubated at 27°C at 90 rpm in a gyratory shaker for 30 minutes. For a given condition, the cell suspension was transferred to a 100mm petri dish either prior to (0 time point) or 30 minutes after aggregation. Images were captured at 10X magnification with a Nikon TE-200 inverted fluorescent microscope (Tokyo, Japan). To quantify cell aggregates, pictures of four randomly selected fields were taken per dish. The area of each object (single cells and aggregates) was determined by the Metamorph software (Molecular Devices) using an auto-threshold setting for light objects and appropriate size filters that allowed the counting of cells and aggregates but not debris. The four replicates were combined to yield average readings per condition. The percent aggregation was then calculated as the average aggregate area at 30 minutes minus the average aggregate area at zero minutes divided by the average aggregate area at 30 minutes [(N30-N0)/N30]. A minimum of three independent experiments was performed per condition. Statistical significance was determined in Microsoft Excel using Student’s T-test. Error bars indicate standard error.  2.7 Site-directed mutagenesis  The I395V, Y412F, R453C, Q479E, S492F, N510K, T605M, V648G, A707T, and L708P tumor-derived mutations (Wang et al. 2004) were generated by fusion PCR using the full-length PTPRT pVL1393-V5-His vector as the template. The primers 5’-TGGCCCACAGAACGTGGAAGTCGTAGACATCAGAGCC-3’ and 5’-CTTCCACGTTCTGTGGGCCA-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the I395V mutant; the primers 5’-CAGTGGGAGCCCTTCGGCTTCGCGGTGACCCGCTGCCAT-3’ and 5’-AAGCCGAAGGGCTCCCACTG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the Y412F mutant; the primers 5’-CTACACCCTGCGAGGCCTGTGCCCCTTCATGACCATCCG-3’ and 5’-ACAGGCCTCGCAGGGTGTAG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the R453C mutant; the primers 5’-GAGCGAGGAGCTGGTGGTGGAGACTGAGGAAGACGTTCC-3’ and 5’-CCACCACCAGCTCCTCGCTC-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the Q479E mutant; the primers 5’-TGTTCCTCTAGAATTCATCCAAGGGGGGCCCT TT-3’ and 5’-ATGAATTCTAGAGGAACA-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the S492F mutant; the primers 5’-TCCAGTGGAAACCTCCCAAGGAGACCAATGGGGTCATCA-3’ and 5’-CTTGGGAGGTTTCCACTGGA-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the N510K mutant; the primers 5’-CCATTGAATGAGACAGACATGACC ATCACAGTGATGCTG3-’ and 5’-ATGTCTGTCTCATTCAATGG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the T605M mutant; the primers 5’-ATTATTGAGTGCTTTTC GGGGCCCGTGAGCTATCGGAAT-3’ and 5’-CCCGAAAAGCACTCAATAAT-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the V648G mutant; the primers 5’-CTACAGCATCTACTTCCAGACACTCAGCAAAGCCAATGG-3’ and 5’-TCTGGAAGTAGATGCTGTAG-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the A707T mutant; the primers 5’-AGCATCTACTTCCAGGCACCCAGCAAAGCCAATGGAGAG-3’ and 5’-GGTGCCTGGAAGTAGATGCT-3’ were used as the mutagenic primers for the L708P mutant.  2.8 Mapping of PTPρ mutations onto the PTPμ crystal structure  The sequence of PTPμ and PTPρ were aligned using CLUSTALW. Mutations probed in this study were mapped using this sequence alignment onto the PTPμ structure (PDB ID: 2V5Y). The figure was prepared utilizing PyMOL 1.2r1 (http://pymol.org).  Go to: 3. Results 3.1 Deletions in the MAM, Ig, and FNIII repeat domains of PTPρ result in defective cell-cell aggregation  To test whether a protein mediates cell-cell aggregation or adhesion, one has to express the protein of interest in the non-adhesive cells. Otherwise, one cannot measure the aggregation or adhesion of a single molecule in the sea of other adhesion molecules naturally expressed in adhesive cells. This is the main reason that the non-adhesive Sf9 or Drosophila S2 cells are widely used models for such studies. To our knowledge, nearly all cell lines of epithelial origin are adhesive cells and thus are not suitable for these studies. Introduction of putative adhesion molecules into non-adhesive Drosophila S2 insect cells has been used to demonstrate adhesive functions for fasciclin II, connectin, Dtrk, ARK, Neuroglian, and Capricious molecules directly (Bellosta et al. 1995; Hortsch et al. 1995; Nose et al. 1992; Pulido et al. 1992; Shinza-Kameda et al. 2006; Snow et al. 1989). In a similar approach, we and others demonstrated that the full-length form of PTPμ induced aggregation, via a homophilic binding mechanism, when expressed in nonadhesive Sf9 insect cells, which are derived from the Fall army-worm Spodoptera frugiperda (Brady-Kalnay et al. 1993; Gebbink et al. 1993; Zondag et al. 1995). We have also used this system for analyzing PTPRT/PTP rho (Yu et al., 2008). Examples of other cell adhesion molecules that have been studied in Sf9 cells include L1 (Gouveia et al. 2008), Galectin-3 (Inohara and Raz 1995) and C-CAM1 (Phan et al. 2001). Insect S2 and Sf9 cells are extremely useful systems to analyze adhesive mechanisms of cell adhesion molecules.  The MAM domain, Ig domain, and first two-FNIII repeats are essential for PTPμ cell-cell aggregation (Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Zondag et al. 1995). To test whether these domains are the minimal essential regions required for PTPρ cell-cell aggregation, baculoviral PTPρ deletion constructs of the MAM domain, Ig domain, and each of the four individual FNIII repeats were made and expressed in non-adhesive Sf9 insect cells (Figure 1). All the PTPρ deletion constructs were expressed and appropriately trafficked to the cell surface (Figure 1). To test whether these domains contribute to PTPρ-dependent adhesion, Sf9 cells were evaluated for their ability to mediate cell-cell aggregation when expressing the deletion constructs. Aggregation assays with Sf9 cells expressing the deletion constructs were conducted alongside aggregation assays using Sf9 cells expressing wild-type PTPρ, which mediates cell-cell aggregation (Figure 2) and serves as a positive control (Yu et al. 2008). Deletion of any of the extracellular domains of PTPρ resulted in defective cell-cell aggregation compared to aggregation of wild-type PTPρ expressing Sf9 cells (Figure 2). Deletion of the fourth FNIII repeat was the least severe where ~23% aggregation was observed. Deletion of the MAM domain, Ig domain and FNIII repeats 1, 2 or 3 resulted in 5–16% aggregation. When the level of aggregation was quantified, we determined that all of the deletion constructs resulted in a large and statistically significant reduction in cell-cell aggregation (Figure 2, p-value<0.005). Together with our previous study, these results demonstrate that all of the extracellular domains of PTPρ are necessary for PTPρ-mediated cell-cell aggregation.  Figure 1 Figure 1 PTPρ deletion constructs are all expressed at the cell surface. Constructs containing deletions of one extracellular domain of PTPρ each were generated and expressed in Sf9 cells. Total cellular protein and cell surface protein were isolated ... Figure 2 Figure 2 Deletion of any of the extracellular domains of PTPρ disrupts cell-cell aggregation. Sf9 cells expressing deletion constructs of the individual extracellular domains of PTPρ were allowed to aggregate for 30 minutes prior to imaging. Scale ... 3.2 Tumor-Derived PTPρ Mutations in the FNIII repeats result in defective cell-cell aggregation  We next tested the effects of human tumor-derived mutations in the FNIII repeats of PTPρ on PTPρ-mediated cell-cell aggregation. We recently demonstrated that tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ are defective in cell-cell aggregation using the Sf9 aggregation assay (Yu et al. 2008), and given the above results, we hypothesized that mutations in the FNIII domains would likewise result in defective aggregation. Ten human tumor-derived mutations are located in the second, third and fourth FNIII repeats of PTPρ (Wang et al. 2004). To test whether these mutations also affect cell-cell aggregation, we engineered the ten human mutations by site-directed mutagenesis using the full-length PTPρ baculoviral construct as a template (see Figure 3). The ten mutations are expressed in Sf9 cells at the expected molecular weight and at similar levels to full-length human PTPρ (Figure 3). All of these mutants are expressed at the cell surface (Figure 3). When these mutant PTPρ proteins were expressed in Sf9 cells and tested in aggregation assays, we observed that all of the mutant PTPρ proteins resulted in fewer and smaller aggregates than wild type PTPρ (Figure 4). When the level of aggregation was quantified, we determined that all of the FNIII mutations significantly reduced cell-cell aggregation (16–43%) compared to cells expressing wild type PTPρ (68% aggregation, p-value<0.008, Figure 4).  Figure 3 Figure 3 PTPρ proteins containing tumor-derived mutations in their FNIII domains are expressed at the cell surface. Ten mutations in the FNIII domains of PTPρ were generated by site-directed mutagenesis and expressed in Sf9 cells. Total cellular ... Figure 4 Figure 4 Tumor derived mutations in FNIII domains of PTPρ are defective in cell-cell aggregation. Sf9 cells expressing the mutated PTPρ proteins were allowed to aggregate for 30 minutes prior to imaging. Scale bar equals 100μm. The percentage ... Go to: 4. Discussion PTPRT/PTPρ is the most highly mutated tyrosine phosphatase in human colon carcinomas. We and others found that PTPRT/ PTPρ is also mutated in lung, gastric and skin (melanoma) cancers (Forbes et al. 2008; Wang et al. 2004). The spectrum of mutations, which included nonsense mutations and frameshifts, suggested that these mutations were inactivating (Wang et al. 2004). Biochemical analyses demonstrated that missense mutations in the catalytic domains of PTPRT diminished its phosphatase activity and overexpression of PTPRT inhibited colon cancer cell growth. Moreover, we showed previously that the tumor-derived mutations in the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ are defective in cell-cell adhesion (Yu et al. 2008). All these data suggest that PTPRT/PTPρ normally functions as a tumor suppressor gene. The experiments presented in this manuscript evaluate the contribution of the individual extracellular domains of PTPρ to PTPρ-mediated adhesion. We demonstrate that in addition to the MAM and Ig domains, the FNIII repeats are required for PTPρ-mediated adhesion. Importantly, we also show that PTPρ-mediated adhesion is impaired by human tumor-derived mutations in those FNIII repeats. These studies indicate that all the tumor-derived mutations located in the extracellular domain of PTPRT are loss-of-function mutations, thereby providing further evidence that PTPRT is a tumor suppressor. This notion is further supported by our recent study showing that PTPRT knockout mice are highly susceptible to colon specific carcinogen azoxymethane (AOM)-induced colon cancer (Zhao et al.).  PTPμ-mediated cell-cell aggregation requires the MAM domain, Ig domain, and the first two FNIII repeats (Aricescu et al. 2006; Aricescu et al. 2007; Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Cismasiu et al. 2004; Zondag et al. 1995). The entire extracellular domain of PTPμ is predicted to make a rigid conformation with extensive interfaces between each of the domains (Aricescu et al. 2006). The minimal adhesive unit for functional cell-cell aggregation is the MAM domain, Ig domain and the first two FNIII repeats (Aricescu et al. 2006; Brady-Kalnay and Tonks 1994; Zondag et al. 1995). However, the FNIII repeats appear to play a role in spacing the key homophilic interaction domain(s) a certain distance from the plasma membrane. Deletion of the FNIII repeats changed the intercellular spacing of two apposing membranes (Aricescu et al. 2007). Cell-cell aggregation assays of the FNIII deletion constructs were not performed in that study (Aricescu et al. 2007). The amino acid residues of the interfaces between the extracellular domains are highly conserved between members of the type IIB RPTP subfamily (Aricescu et al. 2006; Aricescu et al. 2007) therefore it is likely that the PTPρ adhesive interface resembles that of PTPμ. Together our data support the hypothesis that the essential regions for PTPρ-mediated adhesion resemble those of PTPμ.  To gain insight into how the point mutations may alter the adhesive function of PTPρ, we modeled the human tumor derived PTPρ mutations onto the crystal structure of PTPμ (Figure 5). The crystal structure of PTPμ includes only the first three FNIII repeats (Aricescu et al. 2007). Four of these mutations fall within the second FNIII (FNIII-2) repeat (I395V, Y412F, R453C, Q479E). It is important to note that FNIII-2 is required for efficient cell-cell adhesion (Aricescu et al. 2006). Two of the mutations fall in the third FNIII (FNIII-3) repeat (S492F, N510K). The mutation within the linker region between FNIII-1 and FNII-2 (Y412F) could alter the flexibility or positioning between the two domains. The other mutations (I395V R453C, Q479E, S492F, N510K) appear to be clustered in surface exposed regions and/or near the linker regions between FNIII-2 and FNIII-3 that could alter flexibility, position of individual FNIII repeats and/or protein-protein interactions. While these mutations do not correspond to the adhesive interface hypothesized for PTPμ based upon a single static crystal structure (Aricescu et al. 2007), some of the mutations fall within the FNIII-2 repeat which is required for adhesion, and all of these surface modifications would likely alter either the three-dimensional topology and/or cis/trans interactions of PTPρ.  Figure 5 Figure 5 Structural modeling of the point mutations of PTPρ. The point mutations (indicated in red) evaluated in this manuscript were modeled onto the equivalent sites in the crystal structure of PTPμ. The PTPρ mutations likely alter cell-cell ... Other type IIB RPTPs also function as tumor suppressor genes, by regulating adhesion and/or tyrosine phosphorylation of effector proteins. Expression of PTPμ is reduced in human glioblastomas (GBM) and cell lines (Burgoyne et al. 2009a). Reduction in full-length PTPμ expression with a concomitant increase in a proteolytically processed cytoplasmic fragment of PTPμ is observed in GBM cells and both are correlated with decreased adhesion and increased migration observed in the disease (Burgoyne et al. 2009a; Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Over-expression of the full-length form of PTPμ suppressed migration of GBM cells and reduces their survival (Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Of note, at the same time that stable cell adhesion is reduced due to the loss of full-length PTPμ expression in GBM cells, a catalytically active cytoplasmic fragment of PTPμ is released and translocates to the nucleus (Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Catalytic activity of this fragment is also necessary for cell migration and viability of GBM cells (Burgoyne et al. 2009b). Therefore, both the tyrosine phosphatase activity of the cytoplasmic fragment of PTPμ and the loss of PTPμ-mediated adhesion may contribute to the invasiveness of GBM cells.  PTPκ is also implicated in tumor progression. PTPκ expression is reduced in melanoma cell lines and human tissue biopsies (McArdle et al. 2001), and in Hodgkin’s lymphoma cells (Flavell et al. 2008). Over-expression of PTPκ in Hodgkin lymphoma cells reduces cellular proliferation and survival (Flavell et al. 2008). Like PTPμ, PTPκ is proteolytically processed (Anders et al. 2006), potentially as a result of aberrant glycosylation (Kim et al. 2006). It is not clear whether adhesion or catalytic activity of PTPκ is required for its tumor suppressor activity (Flavell et al. 2008; Kim et al. 2006). Of note, the cleaved cytoplasmic domain fragment of PTPκ is catalytically active, translocates to the nucleus and promotes β-catenin-mediated transcription (Anders et al. 2006). Signaling via the PTPκ cytoplasmic fragment might augment the loss of stable cell-cell adhesion and may promote tumor progression.  Although speculative, it is interesting to postulate that tyrosine phosphatase activity and or cleavage of PTPρ will also be an important element of its tumor suppressor activity, as has been demonstrated for PTPμ and PTPκ. Interestingly, we identified and validated STAT3 as a direct substrate of PTPRT (Zhang et al. 2007). STAT3 is latent transcription factor that translocates from the cytoplasm to the nucleus after being phosphorylated at the Y705 residue. It is possible that the cleaved intracellular fragment of PTPρ, which contains the phosphatase domains, translocates to nucleus and dephosphorylates STAT3. Besco and colleagues found that PTPRT associates with the adhesion molecule E-cadherin and its binding partner p120 catenin, which are PTPRT substrates (Besco et al. 2006). p120 also translocates to the nucleus and associates with the Kaiso transcription factor (Daniel and Reynolds 1999). Given the frequency and distribution of mutations in PTPRT/PTPρ in human colon and other cancers, a more thorough understanding of its biological function is warranted.
65||Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase T (PTPRT/PTPρ) is frequently mutated in human cancers including colon, lung, gastric and skin cancers. More than half of the identified tumor-derived mutations are located in the extracellular part of PTPρ. However, the functional significance of those extracellular domain mutations remains to be defined. Here we report that the extracellular domain of PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation. This homophilic interaction is very specific, as PTPρ does not interact with its closest homolog PTPμ in a cell aggregation assay. We further demonstrated that all 5 tumor-derived mutations located in the N-terminal MAM and Ig domains impair, to varying extents, their ability to from cell aggregates, indicating that those mutations are loss-of-function mutations. Our results suggest that PTPρ may play an important role in cell-cell adhesion and mutational inactivation of this phosphatase could promote tumor migration and metastasis.  Go to: Introduction Tyrosine phosphorylation is coordinately controlled by protein tyrosine kinases and phosphatases and is a central feature of many signaling pathways involved in tumor development (1). While activating mutations in protein tyrosine kinases have been shown to play vital roles in tumorigenesis (1), the role of phosphatases is less well-defined. We recently identified PTPRT, also known as PTPρ, as the most frequently mutated PTP gene in colorectal cancers (CRCs) (2). PTPRT was also mutationally altered in lung, gastric cancers and melanomas (2). The spectrum of mutations, which included nonsense mutations and frameshifts, suggested that these mutations were inactivating (2). Biochemical analyses demonstrated that missense mutations in the catalytic domains of PTPρ diminished its phosphatase activity and overexpression of PTPρ inhibited CRC cell growth (2). Taken together, these studies strongly supported the notion that PTPρ normally acts as a tumor suppressor gene. This conclusion was also supported by a transposon-based somatic mutagenesis screen in mice, wherein PTPρ was isolated as a target gene from two different mouse transgenic sarcomas (3).  PTPRT (PTPρ) is a member of the type IIB receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase (RPTP) subfamily (4). Other members of this subfamily include PTPRM (PTPμ), PTPRK (PTPκ) and PCP2 (also called PTPλ, PTPψ, PTPRO-omicron, PTPπ, hPTP-J) (5). These 4 RPTPs share the same domain structure: an extracelluar domain, a juxtamembrane region and two phosphatase domains (6). The extracellular domains of type IIB RPTPs have high sequence identities (7, 8), all consist of a MAM (memprin/A5/PTPμ) domain, an Ig domain, and four fibronectin type III (FNIII) repeats (6). The MAM domain is suggested to play a role in protein dimerization (6). The Ig domain is a disulfide structure that is found in many cell surface proteins and has been shown to mediate homophilic and heterophilic interactions between cell adhesion molecules (6). The FNIII motif was originally identified in the extracellular matrix protein fibronectin and later found to be present in many immunoglobulin superfamily cell adhesion molecules (6). We have identified ~15 somatic mutations that are localized in the extracellular domain of PTPRT/PTPρ. How these mutations affect the functions of PTPρ remains to be determined.  Three close homologs of PTPρ, PTPμ, PTPκ and PTPλ (PCP-2), are known to mediate homophilic cell-cell adhesion (9– 12). Expression of the full-length PTPμ (9) (10) or a construct encoding the extracellular, transmembrane and 55 amino acids of the juxtamembrane domain of PTPμ in non-adhesive Sf9 insect cells induces cell aggregation (9). Furthermore, homophilic binding of PTPμ was demonstrated between PTPμ-coated fluorescent beads and cells that endogenously express PTPμ (9). The minimal region required for homophilic binding was mapped to the Ig domain of PTPμ (13). In addition, the Ig domain is required for proper cell surface localization (14). However, assays that test cell-cell aggregation demonstrate that the MAM and Ig domains as well as the first two fibronectin type III repeats are required for efficient cell-cell aggregation (15– 18). Similarly, PTPκ was also demonstrated to mediate homophilic cell-cell aggregation (11). Here we report that PTPRT (PTPρ), like its homologs, mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation in Sf9 cells. Most importantly, the tumor-derived mutations located in the MAM and Ig domains are defective in this cell-cell adhesion function.  Go to: Results The extracellular domain of PTPρ mediates cell-cell aggregation in Sf9 cells  To test whether PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell adhesion, we made the following PTPρ baculoviral constructs expressing: (1) full-length PTPρ; (2) the intracellular fragment of PTPρ (Intra); (3) the extracellular fragment of PTPρ with its transmembrane domain (Extra-TM); (4) the extracellular fragment of PTPρ with its transmembrane, juxtamembrane and wedge domains (Extra-JMD-W); (5) a chimera containing the extracellular and transmembrane domains of the EGF receptor and the intracellular PTP domains of PTPρ (Fig. 1A). All of those fragments were tagged with V5 epitope tags. Proteins of the expected size were expressed in Sf9 cells infected with those baculoviral constructs (Fig. 1B). All of these proteins, but the intracellular PTPρ, were expressed on the surface on Sf9 cells (Fig. 1C). To test whether these PTPρ recombinant proteins mediate cell-cell adhesion, a cell aggregation assay was performed following the procedure of Brady-Kalnay et al (9). Sf9 cells infected with a baculovirus encoding PTPμ, which was previously demonstrated to mediate cell-cell aggregation, were treated in parallel as a positive control (Fig. 2). As shown in Fig 2, the non-adhesive Sf9 cells expressing either the full-length PTPρ or PTPρ-JMD-W formed cell aggregates. On the contrary, Sf9 cells expressing either the intracellular fragments of PTPρ or the EGFR/PTPρ chimeras remained as a suspension of single cells (Fig 1C). These results indicate that the extracullar fragment of PTPρ play an important role in mediating cell-cell aggregation and the phosphatase activity of PTPρ is not required for this function. Surprisingly, although the construct that encodes the PTPρ extracellular fragment with the transmembrane domain sequences only (Extra-TM) was expressed on the cell surface (see Figure 7), this protein failed to mediate cell aggregation of Sf9 cells, suggesting that additional juxtamembrane sequences are required for either forming or stablizing the cell aggregates.  Figure 1 Figure 1 Expression of PTPρ constructs in Sf9 cells Figure 2 Figure 2 PTPρ mediates cell-cell aggregation Figure 7 Figure 7 Cell Surface Protein expression of PTPμ and the PTPρ mutant proteins PTPρ mediates highly specific homophilic cell-cell aggregation  To test whether PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation, one set of Sf9 cells were infected with virus expressing enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) and another set of Sf9 cells were co-infected with viruses expressing either the full-length PTPρ or red fluorescent protein (RFP). The GFP expressing cells were mixed with equal number cells expressing full-length PTPρ (co-expressing RFP) and the aggregation assays were performed. As shown in Fig 3A, the GFP labeled cells did not aggregate and did not contribute to the aggregates formed by cells expressing full-length PTPρ (RFP). These results strongly suggest that the aggregation of Sf9 cells expressing PTPρ is mediated through a homophilic interaction among PTPρ molecules in trans, but not through a heterophilic interaction between molecules expressed on the surface of Sf9 cells. Interestingly, the homophilic interaction of PTPρ is very specific. Although 63% of the amino acid sequences of the extracellular domain of PTPρ are identical with that of PTPRM (PTPμ), Sf9 cells expressing PTPρ (co-expressing RFP) did not aggregate with PTPμ expressing cells (co-expressing GFP) as shown in Fig. 3B.  Figure 3 Figure 3 PTPρ mediates homophilic cell-cell aggregation The tumor-derived PTPRT/PTPρ mutations in the MAM and Ig domains are defective in cell-cell aggregation  Several studies demonstrated that the MAM and Ig domains as well as the first two FNIII repeats of PTPμ are the minimal essential regions required for its homophilic interaction (13, 15, 17, 18). We identified 5 tumor-specific mutations that are located in the two domains (2). Among these five mutations, the F74S mutation is located in the MAM domain and the other four mutations (A209T, K218T, F248S and Y280H) are located in the Ig domain (Fig. 4A). To test whether these mutations affect their ability to mediate cell-cell aggregation in Sf9 cells, we engineered the five mutations by site-directed mutagenesis using the full-length PTPρ baculoviral construct as the template. The five mutant proteins are expressed at the expected size and at similar levels to wild-type PTPρ on a western blot (Fig. 4B), indicating that these mutations do not affect their protein stability. None of these mutations significantly alter their cell surface expression, as all five mutant PTPρ proteins showed strong plasma membrane staining (Fig. 4C and Fig. 7). However, as shown in Fig. 5, all mutant PTPρ proteins formed smaller aggregates than that of the wild-type PTPρ protein. To quantify the cells aggregates, percentage of cells that are incorporate into > 5-cell clusters were counted (as described in the material and methods section). As shown in Fig. 5, Sf9 cells expressing all the mutants formed significantly less aggregates than that of cells expressing wild-type PTPρ. The deletion construct of PTPρ lacking the two phosphatase domains (PTPρ Extra-JMD-W) and the K218T mutant exhibited similar levels of aggregation that were statistically less than wild-type PTPρ (p < 0.01). Taken together, our data demonstrated that the five tumor-derived mutations located the MAM and Ig domains of PTPρ are deficient in cell-cell adhesion. Therefore, these mutations exhibit varying degrees of loss-of-function in cell adhesion.  Figure 4 Figure 4 Expression of tumor-derived PTPρ mutants in Sf9 cells Figure 5 Figure 5 Tumor-derived mutations of PTPρ are defective in cell-cell aggregation Mechanistically, the defect of the PTPρ mutations in cell-cell adhesion could be resulted from either impaired ability in homophilic binding or reduced cell surface expression. Although immunofluorescent staining indicated that those mutations do not alter cell surface expression qualitatively, it is imperative to quantify cell surface expression of mutant PTPρ proteins. As described in detail in the method section, baculovirus-infected Sf9 cell surface proteins were labeled with Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin and isolated on immobilized NeutrAvidin Gel. Western blots were performed with antibodies to PTPμ (SK18) or the V5 tag. The SK18 antibody recognizes the cytoplasmic domain of both PTPμ and PTPρ. The results shown in Fig. 7 demonstrate that full length PTPμ and the wild-type, mutant and deleted PTPρ proteins were expressed at the cell surface. As a control for a non-cell surface protein, the cytoplasmic intracellular domain of PTPμ (PTPμ-intra) was expressed that is detected by SK18 (9). PTPμ intra does not contain an extracellular domain and therefore is not biotinylated nor precipitated by the NeutrAvidin gel (Fig. 7). Quantitatively, the levels of cell surface expression of the 5 tumor-derived PTPρ mutations were similar to that of wild-type protein. If the cell surface expression level (CSE value) of wild-type PTPρ is arbitrarily assigned as 1, the CSE values of F74S, A209T, K218T, F248S and Y280H mutations were 2.3, 1.1, 1.6, 0.6 and 0.8 respectively. Interestingly, some PTPρ mutants that contain the extracellular domain but are unable to mediate cell-cell aggregation are expressed at higher levels on the Sf9 cell surface than wild-type PTPρ. These results suggest that defect of PTPρ mutation in cell-cell adhesion is mainly due to reduced homophilic binding affinity of the mutant proteins. Interestingly, the cell surface expression levels PTPρ Extra-TM (CSE value = 27) and PTPρ Extra-JMD-W (CSE value = 20) were much higher than that of full-length protein for unknown reasons.  Go to: Discussion We demonstrated that PTPRT/PTPρ meditates homophilic cell-cell aggregation and five tumor-derived mutations located in the MAM and Ig domains impair this function. Our results strongly suggest that those PTPρ loss-of-function mutations are selected for during the process of tumor development; therefore, these mutations should play a causal role in tumorigenesis. We chose to examine whether the MAM and Ig domain mutations are deficient in cell aggregation, because previous studies indicated that these two domains of PTPμ, a close homolog of PTPρ, are required for its cell-cell aggregation function (13, 15, 17). Recently, the crystal structure of the N-terminal MAM and Ig domains of PTPμ was determined at 2.7 Å resolution (17, 18). Five tumor-derived mutations of PTPρ are located in the two domains and all of them can be mapped to equivalent residues in the MAM and Ig domain structure of PTPμ. Based on the crystal structure, the authors predicted that 4 of them (F74S, A209T, F248S and Y280H) would cause significant perturbation of the structure of PTPRT, because these mutations dramatically alter the character of buried side-chains (17). Moreover, the fifth mutation K218T is located on the surface of the Ig domain and the authors predicted that this mutation would directly alter protein-protein interactions (17). Our data indicated that the K218T mutation affects the size of aggregates and only a small effect on the percentage of cells incorporated into the aggregates, suggesting that the K218T mutant may decrease the binding affinity of PTPρ. Interestingly, the other four mutations significantly reduce the percentage of aggregation, therefore, these data suggest that the F74S, A209T, F248S and Y280H mutations dramatically alter the domain structure and lead to perturbation of the homophilic interaction of PTPρ. Our previous studies showed that the tumor-derived phosphatase domain mutations of PTPρ diminish its phosphatase activity and overexpression of PTPρ suppresses the growth of colorectal cancer cells, indicating that PTPρ normally act as a tumor suppressor (2). The loss-of-function nature of these five extracellular mutations provides further supportive evidence to this notion.  The finding that PTPρ mediates homophilic cell aggregation of non-adhesive insect Sf9 cells suggests that this protein could be involved in cell-cell adhesion in human epithelial cells where it is endogenously expressed. The type IIB RPTP subfamily consists of PTPμ, PTPκ, PTPρ and PCP-2. It has been shown that PTPμ, PTPκ and PTPλ (PCP-2), mediate homophilic cell-cell adhesion (9–12). Interestingly, the homophilic interaction of these RPTPs seems to be highly specific, because we and others showed that neither PTPρ nor PTPκ (15) interact with PTPμ. It is worth noting that the juxtamembrane domain of PTPρ may be necessary for its cell adhesion function. As shown in Figure 2, Sf9 cells expressing the extracellular and juxtamembrane domains of PTPρ, but not cells expressing the extracellular and transmembrane portion of the protein (PTPρ Extra-TM), formed cell aggregates, although both proteins were expressed on the cell surface (Fig. 7). Expression of a construct encoding the extracellular, transmembrane and only 55 amino acids of the juxtamembrane domain of PTPμ in non-adhesive Sf9 insect cells induced cell aggregation (9). It is possible that cis interactions between the membrane proximal juxtamembrane domains are required for initiating, stabilizing or maintaining cell-cell adhesion. Interestingly, there are two PTPRT mutations (K788E and R790I) located in the juxtamembrane domain that are found in lung cancers (1). Moreover, Besco et al. showed that PTPρ interacts with cell adhesion molecules including E-cadherin, α, β, and γ-catenin, and α;-actinin (19). PTPμ also binds the cadherin-catenin complex (7, 20–22). Loss of cell-cell adhesion, such as genetic and epigenetic inactivation of cell adhesion molecule E-cadherin, is thought to be a prerequisite for carcinoma invasion and metastasis (23). Therefore, mutational inactivation of the cell adhesion function PTPρ may also play a critical role in tumor migration and metastasis.
66||Tyrosine phosphorylation, regulated by protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) and kinases (PTKs), is important in signaling pathways underlying tumorigenesis. A mutational analysis of the tyrosine phosphatase gene superfamily in human cancers identified 83 somatic mutations in six PTPs (PTPRF, PTPRG, PTPRT, PTPN3, PTPN13, PTPN14), affecting 26% of colorectal cancers and a smaller fraction of lung, breast, and gastric cancers. Fifteen mutations were nonsense, frameshift, or splice-site alterations predicted to result in truncated proteins lacking phosphatase activity. Five missense mutations in the most commonly altered PTP (PTPRT) were biochemically examined and found to reduce phosphatase activity. Expression of wild-type but not a mutant PTPRT in human cancer cells inhibited cell growth. These observations suggest that the mutated tyrosine phosphatases are tumor suppressor genes, regulating cellular pathways that may be amenable to therapeutic intervention. Phosphorylation of tyrosine residues is a central feature of many cellular signaling pathways, including those affecting growth, differentiation, cell cycle regulation, apoptosis, and invasion (1, 2). This phosphorylation is coordinately controlled by protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) and phosphatases (PTPs). Although a variety of PTK genes have been directly linked to tumorigenesis through somatic activating mutations (3–6), only a few PTP genes have been implicated in cancer (7–10). Moreover, it is not known how many or how frequently members of the PTP gene family are altered in any particular cancer type. We have systematically addressed these issues by comprehensive mutational analysis of the PTP gene superfamily in colorectal tumors.  The PTP gene superfamily is composed of three main families: (i) the classical PTPs, including the receptor PTPs (RPTPs) and the nonreceptor PTPs (NRPTPs); (ii) the dual specificity phosphatases (DSPs), which can dephosphorylate serine and threonine in addition to tyrosine residues; and (iii) the low molecular weight phosphatases (LMPs) (1). Using an approach similar to that described in a recent bioinformatic analysis of PTPs in the mouse genome (11), we employed a combination of Hidden Markov Models representing catalytic domains of members of the PTP superfamily to identify 53 classical PTPs (21 RPTPs and 32 NRPTPs), 33 DSPs, and one LMP in the human genome (12). This analysis revealed a set of genes representing all known human PTPs (13) as well as seven putative PTPs.  As an initial screen to evaluate whether these phosphatases are genetically altered in human cancer, we analyzed the coding exons of all 87 members of this gene superfamily in 18 colorectal cancers. A total of 1375 exons from all annotated RPTPs, NRPTPs, DSPs, and LMPs were extracted from genomic databases (12). These exons were amplified by polymerase chain reaction from cancer genomic DNA samples and directly sequenced with dye terminator chemistry (12). Whenever a presumptive mutation was identified, we attempted to determine whether it was somatically acquired (i.e., tumor specific) by examining the sequence of the gene in genomic DNA from normal tissue of the relevant patient.  From the 3.3 Mb of sequence information obtained, we identified six genes containing somatic mutations, including three members of the RPTP subfamily (PTPRF, PTPRG, and PTPRT) and three members of the NRPTP subfamily (PTPN3, PTPN13, and PTPN14). These six genes were then further analyzed for mutations in another 157 colorectal cancers. Through this strategy, we identified 77 mutations in the six genes, in aggregate affecting 26% of the colorectal tumors analyzed (table S1 and Fig. 1). Examination of these six genes in seven other tumor types identified PTPRT mutations in two of 11 (18%) lung cancers and two of 12 gastric cancers (17%), and PTPRF mutations in one of 11 (9%) lung cancers and one of 11 (9%) breast cancers. No mutations were identified in 12 pancreatic cancers, 12 ovarian cancers, 12 medulloblastomas, or 12 glioblastomas (table S1 and Fig. 1). In total, 83 nonsynonymous mutations were observed, all of which were somatic in the cancers that could be assessed (12).    Download high-res image  Open in new tab  Download Powerpoint Fig. 1. Distribution of mutations in PTPRT, PTPN13, PTPN14, PTPRG, PTPRF, and PTPN3. Black arrows indicate location of missense mutations, red arrows indicate location of nonsense mutations or frameshifts, and boxes represent functional domains (B41, band 41; CA, carbonic anhydrase; FN3, fibronectin type III; IG, immunoglobulin; MAM, meprin/A5/PTPμ; PDZ, postsynaptic density, discs large, zonula occludans; PTPc, catalytic phosphatase domain). Black stars indicate PTPRT mutants evaluated for phosphatase activity (Fig. 2), and the red star indicates PTPRT mutant evaluated for effects on cell proliferation (Fig. 3).  Fifteen of the 83 mutations were nonsense, frameshift, or splice-site alterations, all of which were predicted to result in aberrant or truncated proteins. In 16 tumors both alleles of the phosphatase gene appeared to be mutated, a characteristic often associated with tumor suppressor genes. The majority of tumors with PTP gene mutations also contained mutations in KRAS or BRAF, and nine tumors contained alterations in previously reported tyrosine kinase genes (table S1). Thus, the mutant phosphatases identified in this study are likely to operate through cellular pathways distinct from those associated with previously identified mutant kinases.  Analysis of mutations in tumors is complicated by the fact that mutations can arise either as functional alterations affecting key genes underlying the neoplastic process or as nonfunctional “passenger” changes. The multiple waves of clonal expansion and selection that occur throughout tumorigenesis lead to fixation of any mutation that had previously occurred in any predecessor cell, regardless of whether the mutation was actually responsible for the clonal expansion. Two independent lines of evidence suggest that the sequence alterations we observed are functional. First, the ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous mutations provides an indication of selection, as synonymous alterations usually do not exert a growth advantage. There were no somatic synonymous mutations detected in the colorectal cancers analyzed, resulting in a ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous mutations of 77 to 0, much higher than the expected 2:1 ratio for nonselected passenger mutations (P < 1 × 10–6). Second, the prevalence of mutations in the coding regions of the analyzed genes was ∼19 per Mb of tumor DNA, similar to the prevalence of functional somatic alterations observed in other gene families [e.g., the tyrosine kinome (6)] and significantly higher than the prevalence of nonfunctional alterations previously observed in the cancer genomes (∼1 per Mb, P < 0.01) (14). These data support the idea that these mutations were the targets of selection during tumorigenesis.  The great majority of the nonsense and frameshift mutations (Fig. 1) would result in polypeptides devoid of C-terminal phosphatase catalytic domains, thereby leading to inactivation of the phosphatase. To evaluate whether tumor-specific point mutations alter phosphatase activity, we biochemically tested mutant versions of PTPRT, the most frequently mutated PTP in the superfamily. Mutations in both intracellular PTP domains (D1 and D2) were evaluated. His-tagged versions of the catalytic region of wild-type PTPRT, two D1 mutants (Q987K and N1128I), and three D2 mutants (R1212W, R1346L, and T1368M) were produced in bacteria and analyzed for phosphatase activity by using 6,8-difluoro-4-methylumbelliferyl phosphate (DiFMUP) as a substrate (Fig. 2) (12). All D1 and D2 mutants had reduced phosphatase activity compared with the wild-type protein (Fig. 2). The kinetic parameter Kcat was reduced in both D1 mutants, while Km was increased in all three D2 mutants, suggesting that mutations in the two domains may have different effects on enzymatic activity. Although it has been thought that the D2 domain is usually catalytically inactive (1), our results are consistent with recent studies that show that the D2 domain is important for phosphatase activity in some receptor phosphatases (15).    Download high-res image  Open in new tab  Download Powerpoint Fig. 2. Evaluation of phosphatase activity of mutant PTPRT. (A) Saturation kinetics of wild-type and mutant PTPRT. His-tagged versions of PTPRT protein segments comprising the two catalytic domains containing wild-type (WT) and tumor-specific mutant sequences were expressed in bacteria and purified using nickelaffinity chromatography. Equal amounts of WT and mutant proteins were used to evaluate enzyme kinetics. The rate of hydrolysis of substrate (DiFMUP) is plotted against increasing substrate concentration. Data were fitted to the Michaelis-Menton equation, and the resulting kinetic parameters of WT and mutant proteins are indicated in (B).  These biochemical data on missense mutations, coupled with the large number of truncating mutations, suggested that PTPRT functions as a tumor suppressor gene. To determine whether PTPRT expression can inhibit tumor cell growth, we transfected wild-type PTPRT into HCT116 colorectal cancer cells (12). An identical expression vector containing an R632X mutant of PTPRT was used for comparison. Wild-type PTPRT potently inhibited cell growth in this assay, as seen by the substantial decrease in the number of neomycin-resistant colonies compared with the R632X mutant or with vector alone (Fig. 3, A and B). Similar results with wild-type and mutant PTPRT were also observed in DLD1 colorectal cancer cells.    Download high-res image  Open in new tab  Download Powerpoint Fig. 3. PTPRT overexpression suppresses growth of human cancer cells. (A) HCT116 colorectal cancer cells were transfected with wild-type (WT) PTPRT construct, truncated R632X mutant PTPRT construct, or empty pCI-Neo vector. The photographs show colonies stained with crystal violet after 14 days of geneticin selection. (B) Number of resistant colonies (mean of two 25 cm2 flasks) for WT PTPRT, mutant PTPRT, and empty vector.  The combination of these genetic, biochemical, and cellular data suggest that PTPRT and the other identified phosphatases are likely to act as tumor suppressors. This is consistent with the function of other phosphatases implicated in tumorigenesis (7, 8, 16) and with the general role of phosphatases in inhibiting various growth-promoting signaling pathways (2). The absence of biallelic mutations in a subset of the analyzed tumors suggests that some alterations may act in a dominant-negative fashion or may affect gene dosage, mechanisms that have been previously involved in inactivation of other tumor suppressor genes (17, 18).  Little is known about the functional role of the tyrosine phosphatases discussed here. PTPN13 appears to be involved in apoptosis (19) and may be partly responsible for the antitumor effects of tamoxifen (20). Overexpression of PTPN3 inhibits growth of NIH/3T3 cells, possibly through interaction with valosin-containing protein (VCP/p97) (21). PTPN14 and PTPRF are thought to play a role in cell adhesion by regulating tyrosine phosphorylation of adherens junction proteins (22, 23). Because increased phosphorylation of adherens junctions has been shown to increase cell motility and migration (22, 24), mutational inactivation of these genes may be an important step in cancer cell invasion and metastasis. PTPRG maps to chromosome 3p14.2, a region frequently lost in lung, renal, and early-stage breast tumors, and is thought to be a target of the translocation at 3p14 in familial renal cell carcinoma (25–27). However, no point mutations in PTPRG (28) or any of the other genes identified here have been previously described in any cancer. PTPRT is expressed in the developing central nervous system and in the adult cerebellum (29) and had not been thought to play a role in the growth or differentiation of other tissues. We have found that PTPRT is expressed in a variety of human tissues, including normal colon epithelium as well as cells derived from colorectal cancers (fig. S1).  Phosphatases affect signaling pathways that may be amenable to therapeutic intervention in cancer cells (2). Although reactivation of incapacitated phosphatases is likely to be pharmacologically challenging, identification of the corresponding kinases that phosphorylate substrates normally regulated by the mutant phosphatases could provide novel therapeutic targets. Like the analysis of genetic alterations in tyrosine kinases (6), the present study suggests the possibility of individualized therapy based on the mutant phosphatases present in specific tumors. Conceivably, this approach would have broad therapeutic use, because more than 50% of colorectal tumors analyzed to date have alterations in at least one member of the tyrosine phosphatome or kinome. Protein tyrosine phosphatase ρ (PTPρ) belongs to the classical receptor type IIB family of protein tyrosine phosphatase, the most frequently mutated tyrosine phosphatase in human cancer. There are evidences to suggest that PTPρ may act as a tumor suppressor gene and dysregulation of Tyr phosphorylation can be observed in diverse diseases, such as diabetes, immune deficiencies and cancer. PTPρ variants in the catalytic domain have been identified in cancer tissues. These natural variants are nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms, variations of a single nucleotide occurring in the coding region and leading to amino acid substitutions. In this study we investigated the effect of amino acid substitution on the structural stability and on the activity of the membrane-proximal catalytic domain of PTPρ. We expressed and purified as soluble recombinant proteins some of the mutants of the membrane-proximal catalytic domain of PTPρ identified in colorectal cancer and in the single nucleotide polymorphisms database. The mutants show a decreased thermal and thermodynamic stability and decreased activation energy relative to phosphatase activity, when compared to wild- type. All the variants show three-state equilibrium unfolding transitions similar to that of the wild- type, with the accumulation of a folding intermediate populated at ∼4.0 M urea.  Go to: Introduction The classical protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) superfamily includes 38 proteins which specifically dephosphorylate phosphotyrosine residues and, in concert with protein tyrosine kinases, control a large number of diverse biological processes, such as cell proliferation, adhesion, apoptosis and migration [1]–[6]. Reversible tyrosine phosphorylation controls numerous signaling pathways which require a right balance between kinase and phosphatase activity. The involvement of PTP in controlling cellular signaling has been largely recognized [2], [5], [7], though the role of PTP in human diseases has not been explored so extensively as that of protein kinases. However in diverse diseases, such as cancer, diabetes and immune deficiencies, dysregulation of Tyr phosphorylation has been observed [4], [7], [8].  On the basis of their counteracting activity on the oncogenic protein tyrosine kinase, PTPs have been initially considered as potential tumor suppressors, however it is clear that several phosphatases have oncogenic properties [2]–[6], [9]. Over the last decade a limited number of phophatases have been studied systematically to evaluate their role in tumorigenesis. In particular, six mutated phosphatases have been directly linked to colorectal cancers [1], [10]; among the six mutated genes, the PTPRT gene encoding PTPρ (PDB accession code 2OOQ) was found to be most frequently mutated and it was also mutated in about 20% of lung and gastric cancer [10].  PTPρ belongs to the classical receptor type IIB family of PTP. The 107 PTPs encoded by the human genome are classified into four classes, on the basis of the amino acid sequence of their catalytic domain. Class I includes 61 dual-specificity phosphatases and 38 classical phosphotyrosine-specific phosphatase which are further divided into receptor and non-transmembrane groups [5], [7]. The full-length PTPρ contains an extracellular domain, formed by a meprin-A5 antigen-PTP (MAM) domain and Ig-like and fibronectin type III-like repeats, a single transmembrane segment and one or two cytoplasmic catalytic domains. The catalytically active proximal D1 domain is adjacent to the membrane and is connected to the inactive membrane-distal D2 domain [3], [5]. The PTP membrane-proximal catalytic domain consists of about 280 residues that fold into a highly conserved α/β structure [4], [11]. Conserved functional elements of the catalytic PTP domain are the PTP signature motif, the mobile “WPD” loop, a highly conserved aspartate residue required for catalysis and the phosphotyrosine recognition loop.  In cancer tissues several PTPρ variants in the catalytic domain have been identified and there is evidence to suggest that PTPρ may act as a tumor suppressor gene [10]. These natural variants are nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs), single nucleotide variations occurring in the coding region and leading to a polypeptide sequence with amino acid substitutions.  A large number of amino acid substitutions originate from nsSNPs and an increasingly large number of diseases and defects reported in Human Gene Mutation Database [12] and Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) [13] are referred to nsSNPs [14]. Although most nsSNPs are considered not to affect protein function, computational analysis predicts that around 30% of protein variants resulting from nsSNPs are less stable than the most common variant [15]. The effect of disease-causing nsSNPs on protein structure and function has been widely investigated by computational analysis, and change in protein stability has been suggested as the most common mechanism involved in monogenic disease [16]–[18]. However, nsSNPs may also affect and modulate the protein function by altering protein dynamics without affecting protein stability [19]. Notably, since genetic variations related to nsSNPs may influence individual susceptibility to complex diseases such as cancer [20] or response to drugs, a more extended study about the effect of nsSNPs on protein structure may help in understanding their role in inducing protein functional changes [21]. To date there are few experimental data available concerning the consequences of nsSNPs on protein function and stability.  In this study we investigate the effect of amino acid substitutions identified in colorectal cancer [10] and in the single nucleotide polymorphisms database [18], [22], [23] on the thermodynamic stability and on the activity of the membrane-proximal catalytic domain of PTPρ [1], [24]. The analysis revealed that, in comparison to the wild-type, the thermal and thermodynamic stability of all the mutants are decreased as well as the activation energy relative to the phosphatase activity, indicating an increase in protein flexibility of all the PTPρ mutants. All the variants show three-state equilibrium unfolding transitions similar to that of the wild-type, with the accumulation of a folding intermediate at ∼4.0 M urea.  To our knowledge, this study represents the first spectroscopic and thermodynamic characterization of human PTPρ catalytic domain and some of its mutants found in cancer. In addition, the effects of none of the mutations reported in this manuscript on protein thermodynamic stability has been previously investigated.  Go to: Results Four mutations of the PTPρ membrane-proximal catalytic domain in public databases have been identified: D927G, Q987K, N1128I and A1118P. Introduction of these mutations resulted in soluble recombinant protein only for D927G, Q987K and N1128I whereas the A1118P mutant could not be expressed in the soluble fraction even when different growth and induction conditions were used. Mapping of the mutations onto the structure of the PTPρ catalytic domain revealed that A1118P is located in the middle of a central helix (Fig. 1). It is likely that the introduction of a proline residue at this position in substitution of alanine will break the helical secondary structure resulting in misfolding of the catalytic domain. N1128 is located at the C-terminal end of the same helix (Fig. 1B). This residue is located in a very polar environment with flanking acidic (E1124, E1127, E1129) and a histidine residue (H974) located in a neighbouring loop region. D927G and Q987K are located in solvent exposed loops with little interaction with other amino acid side chains (Fig. 1C). The solvent accessibility of the mutated residues Asp-927 and Gln-987 is more than 70% and Asn-1128 is 49% solvent exposed. The mutation D927G involves a residue (Asp-927) placed in a 4 residues turn between two coils. In the wild-type Asp-927 connects different protein secondary structure regions through hydrogen bonds with three residues. One hydrogen bond is between the N of the peptide bond and the OD2 of Asp-947 and the other two hydrogen bonds are between the carbonyl of the peptide bond and the amidic nitrogens of Lys-930 and Glu-931. The carboxylic moiety of Asp-927 is completely solvent exposed and does not apparently make any contact with other residues.  Figure 1 Figure 1 Location of PTPρ mutations. Spectroscopic characterization of PTPρ wild-type and its mutants  The near-UV CD spectrum of wild-type PTPρ shows the contribution of all aromatic residues and is characterized by two negative components centred at 280 nm and at around 298 nm accompanied by fine structure features at 275–280 nm (Fig. 2A). Q987K variant displays a near-UV CD spectrum almost identical to that of the wild-type as well as D927G and N1128I, which nevertheless show a slight decrease of the dichroic activity at 275–280 nm. In line with the near-UV CD results, which suggest a similar tertiary arrangement for the wild-type and all the variants, the fluorescence emission spectra of mutants are similar to that of wild-type protein, being all centred at the same maximum emission wavelength around 338 nm but characterized by a decreased emission fluorescence intensity (Fig. 2B). Far-UV CD spectra of all the PTPρ mutants superimpose well with that of the wild-type and are typical of an alpha and beta protein, showing a local minimum at around 208 nm, a 200 nm zero intercept and a 1.13 ratio of the 208/222 bands (Fig. 2C). These results indicate that the SNP mutations had no effect on the secondary structure of the protein and suggest that, in the native state, the effect of the mutations are directed and localized to the mutated residue with minor modification of tertiary arrangements.  Figure 2 Figure 2 Spectroscopic properties of PTPρ wild-type and mutants. Thermal unfolding  The thermal stability of D927G, Q987K and N1128I was investigated by continuously monitoring the ellipticity changes at 209 nm between 10 and 72°C in comparison with that of wild-type (Fig. 3). The parameter chosen to compare the transition curves of PTPρ wild-type and mutants is the melting temperature (Tm) defined as the mid point of the denaturation process calculated by plotting the first derivative of the molar ellipticity values as a function of temperature (Fig. 3, inset). The temperature-induced ellipticity changes at 209 nm, where the main amplitude was observed, occur in an apparent cooperative transition for PTPρ wild-type, Q987K, N1128I and D927G, and with apparent Tm values of 43.0, 42.0, 41.0 and 40.0°C, respectively. The temperature-induced ellipticity changes for wild type and mutants are all coincident with the heat-induced increase of the photomultiplier tube voltage (PMTV) above 370 V (Fig. 3B), suggesting that the temperature-induced unfolding is accompanied by protein aggregation [25]. Aggregation occurred also when thermal scans were performed at a lower heating rate with a low-temperature shifts of the apparent Tm; the differences between the apparent Tm of wild type and variants were the same as those measured at higher heating rate (data not shown). The observed transitions are irreversible as indicated by the spectra measured at the end of the cooling phase that differ from those of the native proteins measured at the beginning of the thermal transitions (data not shown). Furthermore, inspection of the cuvette at the end of the cooling phase revealed the presence of a large amount of precipitate in all the samples.  Figure 3 Figure 3 Thermal transition of PTPρ wild-type and mutants. Temperature dependence of phosphatase activity  The temperature dependence of phosphatase activity of PTPρ wild-type and variants was examined over the temperature range of 10–42°C (Fig. 4A). The optimal temperatures were estimated to be at 37°C for wild type and Q987K, at around 33°C for N1128I and at 30°C for D927G (Fig. 4A). Notably, at 37°C, the phosphatase activity of all PTPρ variants is significantly reduced and corresponds to 72, 54 and 20% of that of the wild-type protein for Q987K, N1128I and D927G, respectively. The activation energy, Ea‡, determined by the Arrhenius equation (1) in the temperature range between 10°C and the optimal temperature of each protein, corresponds to 13.88±0.40 kcal/mol for the wild-type and to 12.77±0.51, 10.73±0.54 and 11.38±0.46 kcal/mol for N1128I, D927G and Q987K (Fig. 4B), respectively. This result suggests an increased flexibility of all the variants compared to the wild-type, particularly evident for N1128I and D927G whose phosphatase activity is significantly decreased at 42°C. The comparison of temperature dependence of phosphatase activity with the structural thermal unfolding monitored at 209 nm clearly indicates that the D927G and N1128I variants are significantly more flexible and less thermal resistant than the wild-type.  Figure 4 Figure 4 Effect of temperature on phosphatase activity of PTPρ wild-type and mutants. Urea-induced equilibrium unfolding transitions  PTPρ wild-type and variants reversibly unfold in urea at 10°C in 20 mM TrisHCl, pH 7.5, containing 200 µM DTT and 0.2 M NaCl. The effect of increasing urea concentrations (0–8 M) on the structure of PTPρ mutants was analyzed by far-UV CD and intrinsic fluorescence emission spectroscopy and compared to the wild-type.  Incubation of PTPρ wild-type and variants at increasing urea concentrations at 10°C for 30 min, a time sufficient to reach the equilibrium, resulted in a progressive change of the intrinsic fluorescence emission intensity and a red-shift of the maximal emission wavelength. At the end of the transition, above 7 M urea, the intrinsic fluorescence emission intensity is increased about 1.5 fold and the maximal fluorescence emission wavelength shifts to around 358 nm either for the wild-type and all the variants (Fig. 5). Determination of the red-shift of the intrinsic fluorescence emission was obtained by calculating the intensity averaged emission wavelength An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name is pone.0032555.e001.jpg at increasing urea concentration (Fig. 6A). This parameter is an integral measurement, negligibly influenced by the noise, and reflects changes in both the shape and the position of the emission spectrum.  Figure 5 Figure 5 Intrinsic fluorescence emission spectra of PTPρ wild-type and mutants. Figure 6 Figure 6 Urea-induced equilibrium unfolding of PTPρ wild-type and mutants. The same samples used to monitor the fluorescence emission changes during the unfolding transition were used to monitor far-UV CD ellipticity (Fig. 6A). The unfolding process is fully reversible upon dilution of the denaturant, either for the wild-type as well as for all the mutants (Fig. 6A). The urea-induced changes in intensity averaged emission wavelength An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name is pone.0032555.e003.jpg and in 222 nm ellipticity of all the mutants are similar to that of the wild-type and show a sigmoidal dependence on urea concentration, following an apparent two-state transition. However, the transitions monitored by ellipticity changes and An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name is pone.0032555.e004.jpg changes do not coincide (Fig. 6A) suggesting the possible presence of an intermediate in the transition region at approximately 4 M urea for the wild-type and for all the variants. The plot of the relative fluorescence intensity changes versus urea concentration shows a complex dependence upon increasing denaturant concentration for the wild-type and all the mutants (Fig. 6B). The data in Fig. 6B clearly indicate a non two-state unfolding process and the population of a denaturation intermediate at about the same urea concentration of the apparent denaturation midpoints observed by ellipticity and An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name is pone.0032555.e005.jpg averaged changes (Fig. 6 A and B). The folding intermediate detected by relative fluorescence intensity is populated at around 4.45 M urea for wild-type and Q987K and at around 3.95 M urea for D927G and N1128I. The intrinsic fluorescence emission spectra of the folding intermediate are similar for all the proteins: the fluorescence intensity is increased of about 1.5 fold and the maximum emission wavelength is shifted from 338 to 345 nm, with respect to the native state (Fig. 5). The hyperfluorescent intermediate of wild-type and variants retains about 35% of the 222 nm ellipticity of the native state (Fig. 6A).  The transitions monitored by relative fluorescence intensity changes (Fig. 6B) were fitted to a three-state unfolding process which yielded the thermodynamic parameters for wild-type and the variants of PTPρ (Table 1). For the first transition, m values are all closely similar to that of the wild-type, suggesting a similar unfolding mechanism for all the variants; ΔG values lower than that of the wild-type are observed for N1128I and D927G, suggesting a destabilization of the native state for these two variants, that also show a decreased thermal stability (see Fig. 3 and and4).4). For the second transition, that represents the unfolding of the intermediate to the denatured state, the m values of all the proteins are lower than those of the first transition, indicating that a larger increase in solvent-exposed surface area occur in the unfolding from the native to the intermediate state (Table 1). Notably, ΔG values relative to the second unfolding transition for N1128I and Q987K are larger than those relative to the first transition, suggesting a higher stability of the intermediate states, compared to that of the wild-type.  Table 1 Table 1 Thermodynamic parameters for urea-induced unfolding equilibrium of PTPρwild-type and mutants. The near-UV CD changes of D927G, the most temperature sensitive variant, upon increasing urea concentrations were monitored in comparison with wild-type (Fig. 7) to better characterize the nature of the intermediate state. The resulting data were analyzed after removal of the high-frequency noise and the low-frequency random error by a singular value decomposition algorithm (SVD) which resolved two main spectra components either for wild-type or for the mutant D927G. The most significant singular values were 2.05×103 for wild-type and 1.96×103 for D927G, the second singular values were 38.2% and 40.1% of the first singular value for wild-type and D927G, respectively. The plots of the first (V1) and of the second column (V2) of the V matrix which reflect the global change in the 250–320 nm region as a function of urea concentration show non-two state transition profiles comparable to the transitions monitored by intrinsic fluorescence emission intensity and confirm the accumulation of an intermediate at around 4.2 M urea (Fig. 7 B, and C). At this denaturant concentration, the near-UV CD spectra of wild-type and D927G significantly differ from those of the native state and are completely opposite in sign (Fig. 7A). The 298 nm negative band is lost and a positive contribution at 289 nm is present in the spectra of the intermediate state of both proteins. Furthermore, the 280–260 nm region, dominated by contribution of Phe and Tyr residues, in D927G is less defined than the wild-type (Fig. 7A). The data clearly indicate that both the spectral components of the wild-type and D927G contribute to the urea induced transitions with the accumulation of a denaturation intermediate at the same urea concentration range observed by monitoring intrinsic fluorescence intensity (Fig. 5 and Fig. 6B).  Figure 7 Figure 7 Effect of urea on near-UV CD spectra of PTPρ wild-type and D927G. The urea-induced unfolding transitions monitored by far-UV CD ellipticity changes are non-coincident with those monitored by fluorescence (Fig. 6) and near-UV CD (Fig. 7). To identify the number of spectral components contributing to the urea-induced ellipticity changes, far-UV CD spectra were analysed after removal of the high-frequency noise and the low-frequency random error by SVD. The global changes in the spectral region 213–250 nm, analyzed by SVD, indicate that only two spectral components contribute to the far-UV CD spectra of wild-type and all the variants. The most significant singular values are very similar for wild-type and all the variants and range between 1.76×105 and 1.67×105. The second singular values are 19.8% of the first singular value for the wild-type, 16.6% for the D927G variant, 11.2% for Q987K and 8.0% for N1128I. All the other singular values are below 7.0% of the largest singular value and progressively decrease approaching to zero. The plots of the first column of the V matrix (V1), which reflect the global change in the 213–250 nm region, as a function of urea concentration (data not shown) show sigmoidal transition profiles comparable to the transitions monitored at 222 nm for the wild-type and the variants (data not shown). Non cooperative changes of V2 at increasing denaturant are observed. Furthermore, the reconstituted spectra of the first spectral component superimposed well with those of the sum of the first and the second spectral component (data not shown), indicating that only the first spectral component contributed to the urea induced transitions monitored by ellipticity at 222 nm. These results indicate an apparent two-state process for far-UV CD unfolding transitions of wild-type and variants. Thus the data have been globally fitted to a two-state model according to equation 4 with the m parameter shared between all the data sets. The free energy of unfolding, ΔGH2O, of wild-type and mutants obtained from the global fitting are very similar and correspond to 3.56±0.09, 3.63±0.10, 3.65±0.10 and 3.82±0.07 kcal/mol for wild-type, N1128I, D927G and Q987 K, respectively, for a shared m value of 1.06±0.05 kcal/mol/M. Equilibrium unfolding of PTPρ wild-type and variants occurs via a hyperfluorescent intermediate state that cannot be detected by far-UV CD. Hence, the thermodynamic folding intermediate may represent a conformational change which occurs in the proximity of any of the tryptophans most likely due to an increase of native state flexibility [26].  Go to: Discussion PTPρ, which belongs to the classical receptor type IIB family of PTP, is one of the most frequently mutated PTP in human cancers [1], [24]. In this study we investigated the effect of amino acid substitution on the thermal and thermodynamic stability and on the activity, of the membrane-proximal catalytic D1 domain of PTPρ. Catalytically active fragments of several PTPs of type IIB family are proteolytically cleaved and released within the cytoplasm of tumour cells [27]–[29], hence the biophysical characterization of this catalytic domain may be relevant. The D1 domain is a monomeric, structurally independent and stable folding unit characterized by a high thermodynamic stability. In this study, we selected PTPρ mutations of D1 domain found in colorectal cancers [10] and reported in nsSNP database [14], D927G, Q987K, A1118P and N1128I. All the mutants are expressed as soluble recombinant proteins, except A1118P which remains insoluble also upon different growth and induction conditions. The spectroscopic properties of the wild-type compared with those of all the variants indicate that the mutations D927G, Q987K and N1128I had no effect on protein secondary structure with minor modifications of tertiary arrangements.  All the mutants show a decrease in the thermal stability and in the activation energy for phosphatase activity with respect to the wild-type indicating an increase in protein flexibility of all the mutants. Hence, at 37°C the phosphatase activity of all the variants was significantly reduced, similarly to what reported by Wang et al. for Q987K and N1128I [10]. The most destabilizing mutation, D927G, yielded a protein that at physiological temperature was almost completely inactive.  All the mutations studied here are located at very diverse positions in the structure, distant from the catalytic site and, except A1118P, in solvent-exposed loop regions. Presumably, the change in main chain flexibility caused by the most destabilizing D927G mutation may lead to local disorder and may affect the stabilizing hydrogen bonds of residues in close proximity (Asp-947, Lys-930 and Glu-931). This hypothesis is in agreement with the changes in local environment of aromatic residues suggested by the comparison of the near-UV CD spectrum of D927G with that of the wild-type. The N1128I mutation is less destabilizing than D927G. In the wild-type structure N1128, about 50% solvent accessible, is located in a very polar environment at the C-terminus of helix 8 and is involved, through its peptidic nitrogen, in a hydrogen bond with the peptide carbonyl of Asp-1124. The susbtitution of a polar residue, Asn-1128, to a nonpolar residue, Ile, may also contribute to destabilize the N1128I mutant. Q987K is the least destabilizing mutation with regard to thermal stability and temperature dependence of phosphatase activity, probably due to the fact that Gln-987 in the wild-type structure is not involved in any interaction with other protein residues.  All the variants, as revealed by intrinsic fluorescence emission intensity, show three-state equilibrium unfolding transitions similar to that of the wild-type, with the accumulation of a hyperfluorescent intermediate at ∼4.0 M urea that retains 35% of the native secondary structure ellipticity. The hyperfluorescent intermediate of wild-type and of D927G, the most temperature sensitive variant, contains tertiary contacts, although the packing of aromatic side-chains appears different from that of the native state.  The reversibility of the urea-induced unfolding equilibrium at low temperature allows a quantitative determination of the effect of mutations on the thermodynamic parameters of PTPρ catalytic domain. The destabilizing effect of mutations caused by nsSNPs on PTPρ thermodynamic stability (Table 1) may be referred i) to a destabilization of the native state for N1128I and D927G, as indicated by the values of ΔGH2OI-N lower than that of the wild-type, and ii) to a stabilization of the intermediate for all the variants, as suggested by the higher free energy of unfolding from the intermediate to the unfolded state (ΔGH2OU-I), with respect to that of the wild-type (Table 1). The destabilizing effect of D927G and N1128I substitutions is also evident from the decrease in melting temperature monitored by secondary structure changes and from the significant reduction of phosphatase activity at 37°C that suggests a higher flexibility of the two variants with respect to the wild-type.  The reversible equilibrium unfolding transitions monitored by far-UV CD are not coincident with those monitored by near-UV CD and intrinsic fluorescence emission intensity and do not reveal any denaturation intermediate. The thermodynamic parameters relative to the apparent two-state equilibrium unfolding measured by far-UV CD do not indicate any significant difference between the variants and the wild-type and are lower than those determined by intrinsic fluorescence emission intensity. In particular, the shared m value of 1.06 kcal/mol/M calculated from global fitting of the far-UV CD equilibrium unfolding data is significantly lower than the predicted m value for a monomeric protein of 280 amino acid residues unfolded in urea which is 3.71±0.3 kcal/mol/M [30], a value closely similar to that measured by fluorescence intensity. As a matter of fact, fluorescence intensity is extremely sensitive to the microenvironment of a fluorophore and is considered as the most straightforward signal that can be related to thermodynamics of unfolding transitions [31]. The discrepancy between the thermodynamic parameters obtained by far-UV CD and fluorescence intensity and the lack of a detectable intermediate by far-UV CD may indicate that the hyperfluorescent intermediate state represents conformational changes which occur in the proximity of any of the tryptophans, with an alternative tertiary arrangement. In the native state, the maximum emission wavelength (λmax = 338 nm) indicate that tryptophan residues are shielded from the solvent, whereas a partial exposure of tryptophan residues to the solvent is observed for the intermediate (λmax = 345 nm). These results are in agreement with the structural data which indicate that in PTPρ two out of the five tryptophans, Trp-994 and Trp-998, are located in the same helical region (helix 6) and Trp-926, Trp-1023 and Trp-1072 are placed in coil regions. All the five tryptophans are almost completely buried. In the native state the solvent accessibility of the five chromophores is 15% for Trp-998, 14% for Trp-926 and 4% for Trp-1023, whereas all the other tryptophan residues are completely buried. Hence, at approximately 4.0 M urea, it is impossible to assign to any of the five chromophores a particular role in the fluorescence properties of the intermediate state.  In conclusion our results revealed a destabilizing and inactivating role of the mutations of PTPρ D1 domain found in colorectal cancers [10]. All the amino acid mutations studied here are on the surface of PTPρ and could potentially participate in protein-protein interactions. The stabilization of a folding intermediate, coincident with an alternative tertiary arrangement, may play a role in recognition and interaction with other substrate proteins as well as in sensitivity of this phosphatase to degradation.
